[Amit Varma]: One of the great temptations of the modern world is to appear certain of everything.
[Amit Varma]: Another great temptation is to pass judgement on everything.
[Amit Varma]: Certainty and moral posturing get us likes and retweets and raise our status on social
[Amit Varma]: media.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, those who are sure of themselves and sanctimonious towards others also tend
[Amit Varma]: to be both ignorant and useless.
[Amit Varma]: And while we do need to tell simple stories to make sense of it, we also need to be humble.
[Amit Varma]: And in the face of the multitudes around us, we need to nurture the multitudes within us.
[Amit Varma]: The less dots we join to paint a picture of the world, the less accurate that picture
[Amit Varma]: is.
[Amit Varma]: Also, while it is tempting to pass judgement all the time, as that makes us feel both knowledgeable
[Amit Varma]: and virtuous, it again ignores nuance, context, circumstance.
[Amit Varma]: And it stands in the way of our actually changing those aspects of the world that we do not
[Amit Varma]: like.
[Amit Varma]: Those who change the world do not stand at a distance and pontificate.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, they plunge right in, get their hands dirty, and try to move that needle one inch
[Unknown]: at a time.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is my friend Suyash Rai, who I often describe as the finest thinker no
[Amit Varma]: one has heard of.
[Amit Varma]: Suyash has been on the show a couple of times before, but in older, shorter formats, and
[Amit Varma]: I think I've described him as someone who always makes my brain expand a little bit
[Amit Varma]: after I meet him.
[Amit Varma]: He always makes me rethink my beliefs and examine my character, though I do have some
[Amit Varma]: disagreements with him.
[Amit Varma]: Suyash used to work at an IPFP, he was a consultant with the finance ministry for a while.
[Amit Varma]: He has been in the weeds when it comes to actually changing and shaping policy within
[Amit Varma]: the government of India, and he is now a deputy director at Carnegie India.
[Amit Varma]: Suyash has grown up in villages and towns, worked in government, and this conversation,
[Amit Varma]: in many ways, is a close look first at Indian society, then at the Indian state, and then
[Amit Varma]: at the Indian economy.
[Amit Varma]: We discuss tradition, modernity, urbanization, family, ethics, and he even mentions, quote,
[Amit Varma]: the limitations of the canine condition, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: It's a great conversation with one of our finest thinkers.
[Amit Varma]: And it was recorded, by the way, in Delhi in August this year.
[Amit Varma]: I've made you wait since then, and I'll make you wait another minute, because hey, it's
[Amit Varma]: time for a commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of Clear Writing.
[Amit Varma]: An online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction, a lovely and lively community at the end of
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST, or about $150, and is a monthly thing.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiancut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: That's indiancut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: So Yash, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you Amit for having me.
[Amit Varma]: So I just realized this is the third time you're on and the first time you were on we
[Amit Varma]: chatted about demonetization, which was like 20 minutes or something, episode two.
[Amit Varma]: And then episode 120 something, we chatted for two hours.
[Amit Varma]: And then I started that episode by saying that you know what the podcast has changed.
[Amit Varma]: I do deep dives now, which is lol because that was only two hours and I was listening
[Amit Varma]: to it and realizing that I didn't deep dive into some of the things that I like to do.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, we've known each other for six years.
[Amit Varma]: And as you correctly pointed out, there are very, very few people in India who've known
[Amit Varma]: each other that long, if you look at a total set of possible pairs.
[Amit Varma]: But I feel like I still don't know enough about you.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit more about you know, where were you born?
[Amit Varma]: Where did you grow up?
[Amit Varma]: What were your childhood years like?
[Guest]: I'm not very comfortable talking about these kind of things.
[Guest]: But so I come from Eastern UP, my village is in a district called Mau.
[Guest]: And my father was the first from his family to come from a village to a city for the first
[Guest]: time and get his college education, get a job and basically live in the city.
[Guest]: So I was the first person from my family, from the father's side to actually be born
[Guest]: in a city.
[Guest]: And so my father first made the move basically to come to the city and find a footing in
[Guest]: the city.
[Guest]: And so it's like, basically, he was the first amphibian in that sense in the family.
[Guest]: He's a man of the village, but he also found a place in the city world.
[Guest]: And that itself is somewhat of an interesting story, I would say that he studied in a local
[Guest]: village school.
[Guest]: And in that school, there were a couple of good teachers who were interested in teaching
[Guest]: as an activity which is worth pursuing seriously.
[Guest]: And he was touched by their excellence in some ways.
[Guest]: And he worked hard and he got a good schooling education, even though the village is far
[Guest]: from any nearby city, it's 30 kilometers away from the nearest town.
[Guest]: And the school was right close to that village.
[Guest]: And he did well in school education and basically would have studied in some nearby college
[Guest]: only.
[Guest]: But it just so happened that that year when he passed out, there was a census or some
[Guest]: large case survey was being done, perhaps census, that's what I am told.
[Guest]: And they came to our family home in village and they were taking basically all the details
[Guest]: of all the members of the family, two persons had come to do this.
[Guest]: And they asked the head of the family, so to speak, who's my uncle, my grandparents
[Guest]: passed away when my father was still a young boy of nine or 10 years of age.
[Guest]: So my uncle was the senior most person who was also not very old, frankly, just out 15
[Guest]: years older than my father.
[Guest]: And so he was, he is the one who was basically took charge, I mean, that was his virtue that
[Guest]: he saw that as his duty to take care of his family after having lost the parents at a
[Guest]: young age.
[Guest]: So the census was asked him about who all in the family, then my father's name came
[Guest]: up and they asked him what is he doing?
[Guest]: They said that he's just completed schooling and is now going to go to some degree college
[Guest]: nearby.
[Guest]: Then they asked him how much, how many marks have he got, how well has he done?
[Guest]: And he told how my father had done.
[Guest]: They said this is a very good score that he's got.
[Guest]: He should actually try for a better university, not go to college somewhere nearby, which
[Guest]: is okay.
[Guest]: I mean, the degree college near village was okay, it wasn't great.
[Guest]: But he said that he has done quite well and he can get admission in Banaras Hindu University
[Guest]: which was the best university in that region, BHU in Varanasi.
[Guest]: My father was very moody.
[Guest]: He didn't want to do that.
[Guest]: He didn't want to leave the village.
[Guest]: He never left his village, you know, since he was born, maybe traveled a little in 20-30
[Guest]: miles in one direction, but not further than that.
[Guest]: But my uncle had the good sense to basically insist that he should go and he should move
[Guest]: to, I mean, he should try to get an admission in BHU and he listened to him because he was
[Guest]: his elder and he did listen to only one person and that was his elder brother, otherwise
[Guest]: he didn't listen to anyone.
[Guest]: So he went to BHU trying to get admission in engineering, but by the time he landed
[Guest]: there, the engineering admissions had closed.
[Guest]: So then he was coming on his way back, he thought I should have some, have a meal sitting
[Guest]: in BHU itself at a dhaba and there another student he met who suggested that even though
[Guest]: the engineering admissions are closed, you can get admission in BSc physics.
[Guest]: So just chance, right, like the census came and then this person gave him advice and he
[Guest]: said okay, that sounds interesting to me, I mean, physics is interesting.
[Guest]: So he got admission.
[Guest]: That's how he basically made it into a city, you know, and he got his education at BHU,
[Guest]: he did his master's also from BHU, then he worked in the private sector for a few years
[Guest]: and then he got a job in the railways.
[Guest]: So I mean, I was born a few years into his first job and then once he got to railways,
[Guest]: we used to get transferred every few years, three to four years.
[Guest]: So I lived all over UP, we moved to Gujarat for some time, I lived there.
[Guest]: So my schooling was basically all over three to four years in a city and then we would
[Guest]: move on to another city.
[Guest]: So that's the way it was.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating couple of things I want to double click on and one of them is you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: your uncle that, you know, after your grandparents were no more, he had to take charge, that
[Amit Varma]: is what you do.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just thinking about the question of how sometimes character can be shaped by necessity
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that his path also, you know, had his parents not died, might have been
[Amit Varma]: different.
[Amit Varma]: But here he is in this position of being the eldest male in the family and presuming and
[Amit Varma]: therefore he's got to look after everyone.
[Amit Varma]: He's got to, you know, take almost premature parentship of these younger brothers of his
[Amit Varma]: and all of that and his life, you know, hit as much by circumstance as your father's was
[Amit Varma]: then just goes off in this direction and I'm thinking of how it can work both ways in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that on the one hand necessity can shape you and shape your character.
[Amit Varma]: So like another example could be like any number of single mothers out there, you know,
[Amit Varma]: who are widowed early or husband leaves them or whatever and then they become completely
[Amit Varma]: different person, maybe prematurely when they are very young, they get a different kind
[Amit Varma]: of responsibility and they discover a different kind of strength within themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And that's one way it can work that your character is shaped by situation.
[Amit Varma]: But another way it can work is that circumstance can be oppressive in the sense that your true
[Amit Varma]: nature is something that you then have to suppress because you're going along a particular,
[Amit Varma]: you're following a particular destiny as it were to use that term loosely and there's
[Amit Varma]: nothing you can do.
[Amit Varma]: And I think many women in India, for example, would say that this is what happens to them
[Amit Varma]: because you know, in a sense, they have no choice but to follow the conventional path.
[Amit Varma]: You get married, you have kids and you know, maybe even if a couple decides not to have
[Amit Varma]: kids but accidentally even that can kind of take you along a certain path which you may
[Amit Varma]: not otherwise have gone down and that can affect character in a different way and that
[Amit Varma]: can affect a person in a different way.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your thoughts on this sort of broad question about, you know, how circumstance
[Amit Varma]: can change character and how the notion of duty falls into all of this?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So if I look at my uncle, when this situation arose, when in his early 20s, he lost both
[Guest]: his parents and with two younger sons, younger brothers and a sister, I mean, he had to decide
[Guest]: what it was to be done.
[Guest]: There were different paths to take.
[Guest]: So he actually had a job offer at that time to become a teacher.
[Guest]: He gave up on that to actually take care of the family, to take care of the family farm.
[Guest]: We are not a large farm for farmholders, we have medium-sized farm but it was a mainstay
[Guest]: and if he had taken up the job, it would have probably meant neglect of the farm and also
[Guest]: the family.
[Guest]: It's not just about earning money, it's also about the day-to-day business of running a
[Guest]: family with their social obligations to be met and all of that.
[Guest]: So he made a major sacrifice and I wouldn't ever take it away from him that it was his
[Guest]: choice.
[Guest]: It was a decisive choice and he saw that in that situation, what he had to do is to prioritize
[Guest]: the family and he and my aunt both together basically decided that this is something that
[Guest]: they needed to do and they did their duties fully and completely.
[Guest]: And so there was a necessity that arose in some senses but the necessity leads to different
[Guest]: kinds of choices that people make.
[Guest]: You still have a certain set of choices available to you within that situation that you find
[Guest]: yourself and I would say that he was a very virtuous kind of a person as far as the practice
[Guest]: of running a family is concerned.
[Guest]: He was very much devoted to the virtuous side of that practice and he was a great role model
[Guest]: for us.
[Guest]: Even though he didn't study much, he was, I mean at that time, if you remember, he didn't
[Guest]: even have to be a high school pass to get a school teacher job, you know, the education
[Guest]: standards weren't as high.
[Guest]: So he didn't even do his high school but he was good in his studies, whatever he studied
[Guest]: and he still gave up on a path of further education and job and all of that to be able
[Guest]: to take care of family.
[Guest]: So that's on the side of individual choice and virtues and how you define your situation
[Guest]: in life and what do you do when you face a situation.
[Guest]: The other side is the larger setting in which you find yourself, right?
[Guest]: That if you look at a few centuries ago, basically the main predictor of how prosperous you would
[Guest]: be would be where were you born, you know, like which family you were born in, not even
[Guest]: where were you born.
[Guest]: Basically, it was a Malthusian world, not much productivity growth.
[Guest]: If you are born in a rich family, that's great and chances are that you are going to die
[Guest]: in a rich family and if you are born in a poor family, chances were that you are going
[Guest]: to die in a poor family and there was a little bit of immobility that time.
[Guest]: But in the last few centuries, especially since the Industrial Revolution and since
[Guest]: social structures have become more, I mean, liberal and open, there's been much more opening
[Guest]: of opportunities, you know, and there's much more, I mean, there are many more chances
[Guest]: for a person to find ways to, you know, flourish in different ways.
[Guest]: It need not be just pursuing a particular kind of career, but whatever your interests
[Guest]: are and it's become possible because the larger society has changed, right?
[Guest]: Because the economy has changed, the society has changed, the polity has changed.
[Guest]: In many countries now you have a little somewhat more open polity, more open societies and
[Guest]: also economies have changed a lot.
[Guest]: So resources are much more available now.
[Guest]: So now, for example, the main predictors of how you're going to do well, you're going
[Guest]: to do in life is which country you are born in.
[Guest]: That's the most important because I think the, I mean, if you're born in a rich country,
[Guest]: there are just so many more opportunities that you have and so much more that you can
[Guest]: do as far as your own kind of past are concerned.
[Guest]: There are less constraints basically imposed upon you and then there are other factors
[Guest]: that go into play to define how well you do in your life.
[Guest]: But even if you're born in suppose a country which is a little poor, then quite a few countries
[Guest]: have shown that in a fairly short period of time that can change, you know, and societies
[Guest]: can change, things can become different, families can become more liberal and open.
[Guest]: My own family I've seen is that there was a certain opposition initially when I was
[Guest]: very, very young.
[Guest]: I remember when I was a kid, there was some opposition of the idea of women working, you
[Guest]: know, in a job, like a formal job.
[Guest]: The only job that was acceptable at that time was a teaching job because a half day job,
[Guest]: you know, in that sense, you go in the morning, you come and then there are things to be done.
[Guest]: But now it's completely changed.
[Guest]: Like my family still, most of them live in the village, my father, my brother, me, I
[Guest]: mean, we are the only ones who live in the city, our family is still a rural family.
[Guest]: But the opinions have completely changed in terms of education and being open to having
[Guest]: women work outside.
[Guest]: You know, it just happened in less than a generation basically because they saw, I mean,
[Guest]: what works more or less and basically they are following some kind of a herma, what's
[Guest]: good for the family and what would work and then they are changing the opinion.
[Guest]: In fact, my uncle who passed away a few years ago, I mean, he was, at a very old age he
[Guest]: changed his opinions about all of these things, on education, on question of work and all
[Guest]: of that.
[Guest]: So, I think both things have an interplay.
[Guest]: So, what is the kind of larger social setting and I think modernity in many ways offers
[Guest]: many more opportunities.
[Guest]: There are fewer constraints on, people don't feel so hemmed in by their circumstances as
[Guest]: much, no need to, so more and more societies offer more opportunities, but you still have
[Guest]: to exercise your virtues, you know, and have a sense of your, what is it that you should
[Guest]: be doing in a particular situation and what would be the right thing to do for yourself
[Guest]: and for your family and for your friends or your society, for your nation, for the world,
[Guest]: you know, in that sense.
[Guest]: So, it's both of them have to go hand in hand and to be able to, you know, make most
[Guest]: of your situation basically.
[Amit Varma]: So a bunch of broader questions and one of them sort of, there's this beautiful story
[Amit Varma]: I, you know, share with my writing students as an example of really great simple writing
[Amit Varma]: and what it can achieve.
[Amit Varma]: It's a story called Paper Menagerie by Ken Liu, I'll link it from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And it's really about a young man discovering his mother anew after she is no more and discovering
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, he judged her as what we would call unparagovar kind of person, somebody
[Amit Varma]: who was an embarrassment to him, he could never speak to her.
[Amit Varma]: And then when he discovers circumstances of his life, he just sees her in a completely
[Amit Varma]: new way.
[Amit Varma]: And it's an interesting, so I recorded an episode with Natasha Badwar just before this,
[Amit Varma]: I don't know whether it will come out before or after this, but she revealed something
[Amit Varma]: very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: She married someone from a slightly different background, a Muslim man who came from this
[Amit Varma]: village, and she grew very fond of his family and vice versa.
[Amit Varma]: And she realized that initially, they thought that their respective parents would oppose
[Amit Varma]: the marriage and not like each other and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And they found just the opposite.
[Amit Varma]: But what she said was that she, that one thing that surprised both of them, both her and
[Amit Varma]: her husband, is how much their respective in-laws turned out to be different from the
[Amit Varma]: portrait painted of them by their child.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, her husband had portrayed his parents and the village and in a particular
[Amit Varma]: way, and she meets him and she finds out that no, they are completely different, right?
[Amit Varma]: And and vice versa.
[Amit Varma]: And the realization there was that there is this human tendency that we have, that we
[Amit Varma]: fix, you know, we know a person, they become a fixed point in our head.
[Amit Varma]: And then they are that.
[Amit Varma]: And that fixed point remains that, you know, they are frozen in our mind as a particular
[Amit Varma]: kind of person, even when they change and, you know, those changes can sort of be invisible
[Amit Varma]: to us.
[Amit Varma]: And roles can do that.
[Amit Varma]: Someone is fixed in a particular role, like she says, she looks at a mother so much more
[Amit Varma]: differently today in her early 50s, as she did when she was 20, you know, but you can
[Amit Varma]: look back and see that, you know, then you are relating with that person just within
[Amit Varma]: the bounds of that role and what it means.
[Amit Varma]: But now you can look at them as a fully fledged human being and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just thinking that in this fascinating story of your uncle and your father and the
[Amit Varma]: younger generation, you and your cousins and all of that, you know, I get a sense from
[Amit Varma]: this of your uncle, in one way, being a profoundly interesting man who is faced with difficult
[Amit Varma]: choices.
[Amit Varma]: He thinks about within, you know, the limited bounds of how he can understand it.
[Amit Varma]: He thinks about what is the right thing to do.
[Amit Varma]: He makes a choice, that choice involves sacrifice and courage.
[Amit Varma]: He does all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But it is possible that a kid growing up in the family may just see him as an old fogey
[Amit Varma]: and may not ever see that side of him and may not see him.
[Guest]: Or pay attention to some of his opinions, which may seem a little politically incorrect
[Unknown]: at times.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, you know, today we pay too much attention to just the spoken word and not the whole
[Guest]: complex set of deeds that people actually live by, choices they actually live.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, they are not held in a manner which is very deep, you know, so you may have
[Guest]: all kinds of opinions and they can change at times through experience or you may not
[Guest]: even mean that very seriously.
[Guest]: But yeah, I mean, there is a, I mean, this is the story of each human being, right?
[Guest]: In some ways, there's a lot more than meets the eye and it takes a lot of effort and that's
[Guest]: why literature, I think, plays a very important role that it is able to show us this reality
[Guest]: of human life and it's very much in our, the nature of human beings to be able to change
[Guest]: in some ways, you know, in terms of human nature as such may be permanent, but our ability
[Guest]: to change our opinion, adapt to circumstances, do things differently.
[Guest]: So another story.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So, I was, I think, 10 years old or something.
[Guest]: I used to spend my summer in my village, usually, it's a month or so doing summer vacations.
[Guest]: So, I was in my village and I fell ill, very, I mean, I had very high fever and I was just
[Guest]: basically bedridden.
[Guest]: So, they got me some medicines and I took some, took them, I mean, they were helping
[Guest]: the symptoms a little, but the fever wasn't going away.
[Guest]: They took me to a proper doctor and they gave the medicines.
[Guest]: So, I was taking the medicine, but in the meanwhile, they call this old Muslim gentleman,
[Guest]: you know, he must have been at least around 70 at that time.
[Guest]: And he said that this guy is unwell and you have to cure him now, you know, like I said,
[Guest]: what is he going to do?
[Guest]: So he said, he's a, you know, he's a kind of person who does this kind of thing, you
[Guest]: know, like, so it's an alternate way of looking at the situation.
[Guest]: I was a young kid and I was very much situated in our kind of, you know, what Auden says,
[Guest]: believing still versus believing again.
[Guest]: I was still believing still stage that you are very naive about these things and you
[Guest]: actually accept that, yeah, there is a kind of a magical side of the world and things
[Guest]: can be cured in this way.
[Guest]: So he gave me a talisman, you can call me and say, you tie it around your arm and then
[Guest]: this will cure you, you know.
[Guest]: So whatever, it may be placebo or whatever, I think it may have been placebo, but it worked
[Guest]: and I got better a few days.
[Guest]: And he used to come and talk to me every day for one or two hours and really comforting
[Guest]: talk.
[Guest]: He was a, I would say, gentle kind of a soul, very refined, uneducated, but very refined
[Guest]: in that sense.
[Guest]: He was talking in a very, very fine way, you know, his language is very good.
[Guest]: He spoke very pure Urdu and he used to live basically 20 meters from our house.
[Guest]: And when I got better, he used to still come and talk to me every day for an hour or two.
[Guest]: It was just a ritual for him.
[Guest]: And he told me that when his family got into trouble many years ago when he was younger,
[Guest]: my family basically gave them some land very close to our house for them to settle down.
[Guest]: This is a Muslim family, you know, and very conservative Muslim family.
[Guest]: And they said that, please, you can, and they had a kacha house at that time and they were
[Guest]: living in that house.
[Guest]: Then the family did better.
[Guest]: So his sons got handloom, got into handloom, learnt a skill which could turn into a kind
[Guest]: of a livelihood opportunity.
[Guest]: And then they built a pakka house on the same land and they live basically like 20 meters
[Guest]: from our house.
[Guest]: So village is very much, I mean, divided around communities, but there are these interspersed
[Guest]: interesting spaces where people kind of intertwine with each other.
[Guest]: And I was just, at that time, it was nothing, you know, it was just something that I had
[Guest]: an experience.
[Guest]: And that was the last time I met him.
[Guest]: A few years later, he passed away and I never got a chance to meet him again.
[Guest]: And he gave me a story about how that happened, how that land was given as a, like, this is
[Guest]: not a very large farmer, so giving a land is not a small thing.
[Guest]: But we had some land and we gave it to a family that was, that needed it.
[Guest]: And I was thinking, I mean, just a few months ago about that episode just came to me.
[Guest]: My memory had suppressed it.
[Guest]: Then just think about it.
[Guest]: I mean, we are a Hindu family living in a basically a Hindu area and some small patch
[Guest]: of land we gave to a family, a Muslim family to kind of build a small house for some time.
[Guest]: Then they basically settled down there.
[Guest]: They did better economically, but they still continued to live there and there was no question
[Guest]: of taking the land back or anything.
[Guest]: It was their home.
[Guest]: And it is also that all the neighbors agreed to that, right?
[Guest]: Because you're basically family settling down right in that area.
[Guest]: And the way our village works is that basically if you go back hundreds of years, it's the
[Guest]: same family that basically broke into parts and set up houses nearby.
[Guest]: So they are our distant cousins all nearby, but they all agreed to that, you know, to
[Guest]: that process.
[Guest]: And there was a kind of a very complex intertwining of lives, I would say, which I experienced
[Guest]: at that time.
[Guest]: That the eldest son of the only member of the family that has moved out to city is he
[Guest]: has a high human capital potential.
[Guest]: And still you bet on this one guy, you know, magic to cure him while, of course, also giving
[Guest]: medicine.
[Guest]: You know, that's the way belief works.
[Guest]: Last time also when we spoke on the podcast, this kind of a dynamic came up in the discussion.
[Guest]: And when you talk to my uncle or someone about their views on Muslims, they were, I mean,
[Guest]: a little suspicious, you know, that, okay, they are, they have many wounds of the Mughal
[Guest]: Empire and all of that.
[Guest]: There are lots of stories that you hear.
[Guest]: But the fact of the matter is that there is also this side of it, you know, and that in
[Guest]: actual decision making and actually day to day living together, our village has a large
[Guest]: number of Hindu and Muslim families both.
[Guest]: And in many ways, they are very intertwined.
[Guest]: And in some ways, they are separate, you know, so they live in different areas.
[Guest]: In some places, as I just gave an example, they also live in the same area as well.
[Guest]: So, I think what matters more is that when a situation comes to take a decision, what
[Guest]: is to be done, what do you do at that time, what are the, are you following some kind
[Guest]: of a, some notion of dharma, I would say, you know, or some notion of virtue or righteousness
[Guest]: at that time or not.
[Guest]: For the rest, I don't pay too much attention now, at least as I've spent, because my family
[Guest]: lives in different centuries at the same time, you know.
[Guest]: So we've seen that, you know, how things can change and what really matters and what doesn't
[Guest]: matter in some senses.
[Guest]: So I told you the story mainly to be able to highlight this, the question that you asked
[Guest]: about people and how complex they can be and how their actions can be very different from
[Guest]: their stated opinions if you ask them in a survey, whether it's a Pew survey or whatever.
[Guest]: So give me a sense of the, you know, but before you get in, there's a book recommendation
[Guest]: I can make.
[Guest]: So this is a book on Ghazi Mian, which Shahid has written.
[Guest]: I think it's worth reading carefully in terms of how modernity changes our imagination of
[Guest]: identity and how in a way it hardens it, while also pretending to give us the opportunity
[Guest]: to make and remake ourselves continuously and also sometimes it also can harden it.
[Guest]: So this is an interesting book about this conquistador who comes to India and gets intertwined
[Guest]: in our lives in very, very interesting ways.
[Amit Varma]: Actually, my question was just going to be about that, about modernity itself, because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, through our lenses and my lens, a lot of my lens really comes from the West
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, the Enlightenment and so on.
[Amit Varma]: We think of modernity in a particular way, but modernity plays out in, you know, different
[Amit Varma]: kinds of subtle ways when it comes to our towns and our villages and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And what you sort of describe here, for example, where opinions on women have, you know, subtly
[Amit Varma]: changed over a generation, where you're moving in so many directions and at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: it is true, what you said of your family is true of India, that we're living in many different
[Amit Varma]: centuries at the same time.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sense of modernity?
[Amit Varma]: Like how is that village changing?
[Amit Varma]: I can look around me and in a sense, we have a sense of how a city is changing like Bombay
[Amit Varma]: or Delhi, and of course, it's deeply complex, and there's a lot there, but it is whatever
[Amit Varma]: of that we don't know, I think would fall in the realm of the known unknown.
[Amit Varma]: But in villages, which especially for, you know, city slickers like me, is such a dark
[Amit Varma]: space and, you know, and it's been either romanticized by Gandhi, who, you know, which
[Amit Varma]: he started doing from a time when he hadn't actually been to a village as Ram Guha points
[Amit Varma]: out in the 19th century, or it's been condemned with some justification by Ambedkar as a den
[Amit Varma]: of localism and all of those vices.
[Amit Varma]: But it's a complicated space, it's a complicated space of real people, you know, who are reacting
[Amit Varma]: in unusual ways, which are hard to pin down, as you just pointed out through the story.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a sense, maybe using your village as an example, that how do we look at modernity
[Amit Varma]: in an Indian context? What does it mean to be modern? What does it mean to progress?
[Amit Varma]: And is some of this movement in a direction which others may not call modern, which can
[Amit Varma]: lead to, like you said about Mr. Amin's book, can lead to a hardening of identities rather
[Amit Varma]: than the suffering?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I mean, this is something that I've been thinking about, but my thoughts are not
[Guest]: at the level of, I mean, articulation is not so clear.
[Amit Varma]: This is the show for thinking about.
[Amit Varma]: Thinking aloud.
[Guest]: So I'll give you a few kind of images of and then see how, let's see where it goes.
[Guest]: So another short story, I went to my village and so to get to my village, you have to take
[Guest]: a narrow lane away from, I mean, there's a branching off from the road and then that
[Guest]: lane takes you to my village.
[Guest]: My cousin had come to pick me up from the bus stand.
[Guest]: So then I was on a bike with him and we were going, this is a few years ago.
[Guest]: And then as we got into the lane and came near the village, there was a Maruti van,
[Guest]: a car parked next to the lane and with this very bright light, fluorescent light glowing
[Guest]: from inside and very loud music being played.
[Guest]: So I said, this is very odd for us to see that in a village, right?
[Guest]: And then some guy is sitting there and drinking Limca, Limca, Coke, mostly Limca.
[Guest]: And I said, what's going on?
[Guest]: So my cousin said something about, you know, basically a caste related thing that these
[Guest]: guys have gone and earned some money abroad from the city and showing off in the village.
[Guest]: So I said, yeah, very interesting.
[Guest]: So that's one image.
[Guest]: Another image is of locked houses.
[Guest]: So quite a few people in my village have basically left the village now.
[Guest]: I mean, the urbanization is happening at a much rapid pace than perhaps even the official
[Guest]: data actually indicates.
[Guest]: So lots of people are moving into cities in a manner that the entire family is gone.
[Guest]: So lots of houses are now basically locked.
[Guest]: I mean, I wouldn't say at the percentage, it may not be very large, but it's conspicuous.
[Guest]: So maybe 5% or 10% of the houses are now basically locked.
[Guest]: And earlier what used to happen is that obviously some member of the family will go to the city
[Guest]: to earn and maybe even settle down like we did.
[Guest]: And but there will be people in the village, like in my family, most of the families still
[Guest]: live in the village.
[Guest]: But there are now families that are basically just up and left and that will have some impact
[Guest]: on kind of village life there, you know, if you're part of the village can entirely leave.
[Guest]: Third is that you see, and market has entered significant ways.
[Guest]: So my village, slightly larger village than the nearby village.
[Guest]: So people come there for transactions, economic transactions.
[Guest]: So 30 years ago, you could only see basically agriculture commodities being exchanged there
[Guest]: on a Thursday market that used to be held in my village.
[Guest]: Now you see much more, you know, there are many more products being sold and bought and
[Guest]: this much larger market.
[Guest]: And this is, of course, outside of the APMC, you know, the India markets work if the state
[Guest]: is not looking at it very carefully.
[Guest]: So the market has expanded very significantly.
[Guest]: This is something I've got a very clear 30 year, year on year time series on what was
[Guest]: being sold earlier.
[Guest]: I used to go there, we would get five rupees to go and go in the market on Thursday evening.
[Guest]: Now it's much more selling, many more people are participating across different caste groups
[Guest]: and all of that.
[Guest]: So there's urbanization, there is some degree of mobility, I think, as far as people going
[Guest]: to cities especially is concerned, there is some degree of market activity in this in
[Guest]: the villages.
[Guest]: But overall, I think the village productivity story is not taken off.
[Guest]: So if you look at my own village land and how much we earn from the land per acre or
[Guest]: something, it's a very, very small improvement over 30-40 years.
[Guest]: And that's a big problem because it's basically become that so much of the migration in India
[Guest]: is now pushed that you don't have anything to do in the village, so you move out and
[Guest]: do other things.
[Guest]: So we need to get the agriculture, you know, productivity story right, invest in infrastructure,
[Guest]: get the markets working, whatever is required.
[Guest]: I study a little bit of this, I'm not an expert myself, my colleagues have worked on it, that
[Guest]: per acre productivity in countries like Taiwan and China and all is much higher than us and
[Guest]: we need to get it right.
[Guest]: So that's become a problem because especially for people who have land, you know, it's become
[Guest]: like an albatross around your neck or I don't know what the right metaphor is, it basically
[Guest]: ties you down in some ways.
[Guest]: And in fact, people who don't have land are more free, you know, because they don't have
[Guest]: much anyway, so by the way of property, they freely move and go try to find, it's not easy
[Guest]: to make it in the city, so I wouldn't underestimate the struggle.
[Guest]: But there is at least less to be tied down with.
[Guest]: And that is creating, I think, some degree of bad blood also.
[Guest]: So I think we are seeing a little bit more of conflict in some ways.
[Guest]: I'm just talking about my little microcosm, there's a little bit more conflict across
[Guest]: identity groups, a little more perhaps because there is a little bit more envy that people
[Guest]: who are supposed to be, you know, in a different class have suddenly, you know, in just a few
[Guest]: years gone and gotten a little cash rich, you know, and therefore are able to assert
[Guest]: their identities in a little more assertive, more clear way.
[Guest]: So it is a time of churning, you know, and it's been a time of churning for because see,
[Guest]: I am talking about the last 30 years.
[Guest]: So basically, this is a period of, you know, economic renewal in India, revival, renewal,
[Guest]: whatever you called it.
[Guest]: This is a period in which there has been quite a bit of economic activity in India, even
[Guest]: though UP has been not as much touched, but UP has done, I mean, better than it had done
[Guest]: earlier.
[Guest]: Plus, also people from UP go and work all over the country.
[Guest]: So my village, in fact, the main destination is Bombay, you know, people who go out to
[Guest]: work, they work in Bombay mostly.
[Guest]: Lately, many of them have been going to Kerala, Bangalore also, and some come to Delhi.
[Guest]: But main destination is Bombay and Bombay has always had cash opportunities, you know,
[Guest]: you land up there and you can make 500 rupees a day, basically at the beginning itself.
[Guest]: And that's the thing Bombay even today offers.
[Guest]: So even though UP itself hasn't got its kind of economic story, right, there is a long
[Guest]: distance migration that is to be done to be able to make some money.
[Guest]: My village has always had, at least for last 30 years has that.
[Guest]: So this churning is economic and social and also to some extent political, you know, like
[Guest]: I see so much of this coalitions happening across because every year, every election
[Guest]: there are different party wins in my part of that constituency.
[Guest]: So and caste alignments are becoming far more, you know, flexible in some senses.
[Guest]: And I think BJP has a lot to do with because BJP has been making claims for all kinds of,
[Guest]: you know, because they believe that pretty much anybody who identifies as an Indian can
[Guest]: vote for them.
[Guest]: So they make claims for everybody's vote basically.
[Guest]: So they've been able to make headways into a number of communities and then others have
[Guest]: to hit back and try to claim what they think is there.
[Guest]: So political mobilization has also become very, very, very intense, I would say.
[Guest]: So whenever I go to my village now, there is some kind of, I haven't been in the last
[Guest]: two years, so to be very clear, because of various reasons.
[Guest]: But until then, whenever you go, basically, there's so much activity happening, you know,
[Guest]: like something will be happening, either BJP doing some kind of a Ramayana Katha or some
[Guest]: kind of bhajan or some social, we are socially very active and politically also very active.
[Guest]: So these things come together sometimes.
[Guest]: So one of the things about my village is that it holds the entire Ramayana, this, it stages
[Guest]: the Ramayana during the Dussehra time.
[Guest]: So every day, so somebody will play Lord Ram, somebody will play Sitaji, somebody will play
[Guest]: Lakshman, somebody I used to know, recently used to play Hanuman, he was a local Pehalwan
[Guest]: and it used to be a very seriously done thing, you know.
[Guest]: So those traditions have continued, but there is a little more commercialization around
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: So now they get sponsorships, all of that earlier, it used to be just Chanda, go to
[Guest]: hand, family after family, collect Chanda.
[Guest]: So I think the association life is still very rich.
[Guest]: So there is, there are all kinds, so there is, I know there is a Jawahar Yuva Mandli,
[Guest]: which is basically, it's kept after Nehruji's name, that it's an association of young people.
[Guest]: Most of them are BJP supporters, but Mandli is still called Jawahar Yuva Mandli.
[Guest]: But then there is a Gau Raksha Samiti, but not the kind that gets the bad news, but they
[Guest]: take care of cows that are basically abandoned by others and all of that.
[Guest]: There is a market and I think because more resources have become available, a little
[Guest]: more than earlier, people are able to do these things in a slightly grander scale.
[Guest]: So yeah, so there is churning, there is a little more conflict, there are more opportunities
[Guest]: overall.
[Guest]: There is more opening to different people of different identities, men or women of different
[Guest]: groups.
[Guest]: And I mean, I would say, I mean, to put a long story short is that we are modernizing,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in our own way.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and those two stories, the first two stories you told have such resonant images.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I can totally imagine a book called The Village of Locked Houses, or the image
[Amit Varma]: of people drinking Limca in a car with fluorescent light from inside.
[Amit Varma]: And both those stories in one sense are stories of escape.
[Amit Varma]: Like in the Limca case, it's like you pointed out a bunch of people, they are trapped within
[Amit Varma]: this caste identity and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But then they go to a city and they feel like with, you know, with what they've earned and
[Amit Varma]: living a better life, perhaps they can transcend it, perhaps they can escape it.
[Amit Varma]: And the other story of locked houses is again, very overtly a story of escape, you want to
[Amit Varma]: get away from the village.
[Amit Varma]: And you spoke about how, you know, a lot of people leave villages and go to cities because
[Amit Varma]: of the push factor.
[Amit Varma]: It is not what is attracting them.
[Amit Varma]: But it is life is so nasty, brutish and short, as it were.
[Guest]: Not really nasty, brutish and short, but it's not an easy life.
[Amit Varma]: And if you have better opportunities, you go out.
[Amit Varma]: So, my question, therefore, is about how have aspirations changed?
[Amit Varma]: Because I imagine that in an earlier generation, you know, your typical aspirations would be
[Amit Varma]: that if life is tough in a village and you can't make it there, that you get some kind
[Amit Varma]: of government job somewhere, either in the village or the nearby town or the city or
[Amit Varma]: whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But you get a government job because the government is everything back in the day before liberalization
[Amit Varma]: and you become part of the rent seeking apparatus and being part of the government raises your
[Amit Varma]: social status and all of that comes into play, right?
[Amit Varma]: But in these times where, number one, markets are much more visible, there are many more
[Amit Varma]: different kinds of opportunities.
[Amit Varma]: And number two, technology and the spread of the smartphone, especially post geo, when
[Amit Varma]: broadband kind of became much more widely available, you know, how does that change
[Amit Varma]: aspirations and the way that you look at the world and all of that?
[Amit Varma]: And how does all that also change the politics, because I imagine in the past, from the views
[Amit Varma]: I have, and you can correct me if they are not nuanced enough, but in the past, I would
[Amit Varma]: imagine that your village politics would really revolve around two things.
[Amit Varma]: One is you vote for whatever tribe you have taken, and I don't literally mean tribe, but
[Amit Varma]: whichever side you have taken, so you get some of the spoils of power are shared with
[Amit Varma]: you or shared by whatever identity grouping you're part of that you voted for.
[Amit Varma]: And the other is an assertion of that tribal feeling, you know, a lot of voting is actually
[Amit Varma]: all voting is in a sense irrational at the individual level, because one vote doesn't
[Amit Varma]: make a difference.
[Amit Varma]: But people still do it for a variety of complicated reasons, one of which is you're asserting
[Amit Varma]: your identity, you're saying I'm part of this group, you know, I'll go to watch a, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Manchester City match, because that's my tribe, right?
[Amit Varma]: So I'll go vote for Bhajapal or whatever, because that's my tribe.
[Amit Varma]: And I would imagine these would in the past have been the dominant two reasons for voting.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm wondering if aspirations regarding to that have also changed since you point
[Amit Varma]: out that politics has become much more fluid, in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, in contrast with what we think about voter apathy, like, again, I have an
[Amit Varma]: old impression from a long while back, you probably know better, that people in urban
[Amit Varma]: areas vote less than people in rural areas.
[Amit Varma]: Is that true?
[Guest]: Or am I getting it the other way around?
[Guest]: That's true.
[Amit Varma]: People vote more.
[Amit Varma]: Vote more.
[Amit Varma]: And that's because people in cities tend to be sort of more apathetic and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your sense of all of this?
[Amit Varma]: How have aspirations changed?
[Amit Varma]: What does a young person in a village now want?
[Amit Varma]: Like what would your nephews and nieces in the village, what would they want as a kind
[Amit Varma]: of growing up?
[Amit Varma]: What are they thinking of?
[Amit Varma]: And then as a secondary thing, how does that play into the politics?
[Guest]: Yeah, so you started the question on government jobs.
[Guest]: So yeah, I think it's even now, because of age compression and similar issues, privileges,
[Guest]: government job is still a preferred kind of entry point into the urban life, or even if
[Guest]: you get in the rural area, a government job, I mean, it's pretty good, because the kind
[Amit Varma]: of wage compression that we have.
[Amit Varma]: What do you mean wage compression?
[Guest]: So the entry wage to top wage ratio is quite compressed there.
[Guest]: So this entry wage is quite good here.
[Guest]: If you start even at the lowest rank official in government, you get at least twice of what
[Guest]: you would make in any other comparable kind of position in private sector.
[Amit Varma]: Though you would rise faster there, but you're getting a guaranteed income and stability.
[Guest]: But it's also a secure job, other privileges, as I said.
[Guest]: So it's still there, but it's basically become like a lottery, okay, you'll get it and some
[Guest]: people who are good in studies, they aspire to good government jobs, like they write UPSC
[Guest]: exams and all.
[Guest]: Although once in a generation, once in five, six years, somebody will crack a serious like
[Guest]: PCA, Professional Civil Services or IAS exam.
[Guest]: Others will try to get entry into CRPF and police and all and that's a larger number,
[Guest]: much larger number.
[Guest]: I know at least quite a few people personally who have become, who at least got into CRPF
[Guest]: or BSF and all these kind of places where you have a clear entry condition and you pass
[Guest]: that and you can get in.
[Guest]: For the rest, as you said, rightly, that the economy has changed significantly and we are
[Guest]: one country, so whenever, see, it's just a question of longer train rides, right?
[Guest]: Because you take overnight, you get to Delhi, a little over, more than overnight, get to
[Guest]: Delhi.
[Guest]: Travel for 12 more hours, you get to Bombay, you travel for 12 more hours, you get to Bangalore
[Guest]: and travel a little more.
[Guest]: And then, I mean, if you're going there for a long time and you're trying to, and it's
[Guest]: not an issue.
[Guest]: And one of the things that I think about India is that you feel like it's India wherever
[Guest]: you go.
[Guest]: Because that's something that I always felt, I've been to most states of India and you
[Guest]: feel some kind of familiarity, very strangely, but language is very different, cuisine is
[Guest]: quite different.
[Guest]: But there is, in the unconscious, there is something about Indian, of course, go to temple,
[Guest]: you see some other form of the deity, but you see, you can make a connection, you know,
[Guest]: like I didn't have as much difficulty doing darshan in temples in the south, you know,
[Guest]: because I could see where the larger mythology is coming from.
[Guest]: So anyway, so the point of the matter is that the opportunities have really increased in
[Guest]: terms of, not in my village as such, they have increased a little, but you know how
[Guest]: UP is and how it's not been as bad as, say, some states like Bihar have done, but it has
[Guest]: also not done as well as some of the states like Haryana and Tamil Nadu and all of them.
[Guest]: But so you have the opportunity to move out.
[Guest]: So there's a lot of seasonal migration, basically, to get a fine and have a footing in the urban
[Guest]: area.
[Guest]: So I'm now talking about large numbers.
[Guest]: So there are some who get a government job or something, some who get a better higher
[Guest]: quality private job, like a formal job.
[Guest]: But most of them, actually, most of the people can't do that, you know, even, even if you
[Guest]: have a slightly better family, if unless you have very good studies and all, it's very
[Guest]: difficult to do that.
[Guest]: So there are two paths, either you go and work as a entry level worker in any, you can
[Guest]: get into a private bank, basically trying to, in the sales side, if you have got a little
[Guest]: bit of education, or if you are actually you got no education, then you have to basically
[Guest]: work as a manual labourer and then work and get some skills.
[Guest]: So within that there are directions, some people have become contractors, or some people
[Guest]: who went as manual labourers, then in 10 years, they became contractors who then started sourcing
[Guest]: labourers from from our village.
[Guest]: Then that's so that's one set of paths, there is a trading path.
[Guest]: So you start trading something, so you start getting stuff from some other part of the
[Guest]: country and selling here or get take something from here and sell somewhere else.
[Guest]: Because markets have become a little more, you know, vibrant, there are more opportunities
[Guest]: of that kind.
[Guest]: So for example, in my village, there are a few shops that get the person takes a truck
[Guest]: travels to Punjab, buys clothes and sells here at 2x basically the price, and including
[Guest]: the transaction costs of going and coming and and still the reasonable business, somebody
[Guest]: does the same thing with shoes, they'll go to Agra or somewhere else and get it.
[Guest]: So the opportunities are now much greater, agriculture has become basically a much smaller
[Guest]: part of the economy.
[Guest]: That's the main main thing that has happened.
[Guest]: So earlier as a share of the activities in village, if you're a landless labourer, something
[Guest]: and it's not just NREGA, NREGA has had an impact on that as well, because it's pushed
[Guest]: the wages up.
[Guest]: But there's just so many other opportunities going on at the same time, because the economy
[Guest]: is growing and not just maybe not in UP, but you just see Haryana is the richest large
[Guest]: state in the country in per capita income, and it's basically overnight from our from
[Guest]: our part of the country.
[Guest]: So you can just go there and if you go to Gurgaon, you will you will end up earning
[Guest]: at least a decent way so that and what you send back is actually has a much more purchasing
[Guest]: power, right?
[Guest]: Even if you send back 200 rupees a day, that 200 rupees a day goes a long way in the village
[Guest]: as cash goes.
[Guest]: So the so economic aspirations have really diversified a lot.
[Guest]: So people are seeking different paths, because they're also good at different things.
[Guest]: And obviously, you have to keep maintaining the dynamism in the economy to be able to
[Guest]: do that, you know, to have these opportunities growing.
[Guest]: So I think these are still I'm talking about mostly about men.
[Guest]: For women, it's still if you're a woman born in a village, still there are very few
[Guest]: paths that are available to you directly, unless you get very like, I know, one of my
[Guest]: neighbor's daughter, she actually got very good, she's very good at studies, she got
[Guest]: admission in Ames, you know, and did medicine there and basically settled here in national
[Guest]: capital territory only.
[Guest]: And but that's very rare, otherwise, basically, the best thing you can aspire to be is a government
[Guest]: school teacher, still, because one of the main reasons is very poor quality education
[Guest]: in my village.
[Guest]: So I told you about my father and how he studied in a village school.
[Guest]: And there were two good teachers there, who basically, you know, there's, I think Henry
[Guest]: James, a teacher, she's at Trinity, you know, so it's like that he they basically were so
[Guest]: virtuous and so devoted to the what you call goods internal to the practice of teaching,
[Guest]: you know, they were just enjoy teaching so much, that they just changed lives, you know,
[Guest]: and now this just gone.
[Guest]: And that just shapes the paths of so many kids in my village.
[Guest]: So the small number that I'm talking about, who are able to get good jobs and all could
[Guest]: be much larger, if you had just one good teacher, or one good school with two, three good teachers,
[Guest]: who just did their basic duties, you know, and then there's so much hunger in this in
[Guest]: my part of the in my village, on young kids, whenever I go and try to talk to them or what
[Guest]: they plan, they just want to get ahead, you know, they're young, they're full of dreams.
[Guest]: But I feel that many of them will basically settle down at something which is much below
[Guest]: their potential.
[Guest]: So when my father retired, he started this practice of basically going and doing counseling
[Guest]: for kids in village schools.
[Guest]: So he used to just take here a driver in a car, just go and give a talk to all the students
[Guest]: in a school orientation talk, then give each of them a psychometric test of their aptitude.
[Guest]: These are the ninth or 10th standard kids.
[Guest]: So they have some, some understanding of, you know, some aptitude has formed in some
[Guest]: sense is clear, what is a good direction for them to take, and then give them some guidance.
[Guest]: He developed these tools with some psychology professors in Gorakhpur University only who
[Guest]: also seemed keen to at least contribute to their community in some ways.
[Guest]: And he did, there was thousands of kids, you know, to just give them some kind of guidance
[Guest]: about what would be good for them, what would be a suitable path for them.
[Guest]: And he used to tell me the hunger with which he was, you know, received, because nobody
[Guest]: would talk to them, you know, nobody would say, see, internet is full of a lot of information,
[Guest]: but guidance is not information, guidance is somebody has to take interest in you, you
[Guest]: know, somebody has to care about you, somebody has to follow you up and somebody has to push
[Guest]: you when you're feeling down, you know, and that's just missing from our, I mean, at least
[Guest]: in my village, the private schools that we have and the government school, and I'm sorry
[Guest]: to say one of the private school is run by my family also, where the teachers simply
[Guest]: are not, they're just going through the motions, you know, and whenever we try to say, okay,
[Guest]: can you do it, but the whole economy is set up in such a way that you get teachers who
[Guest]: pay a little, you can't pay as much, you know, in a private school as the government schools
[Guest]: get paid.
[Guest]: And they do it only as a part time thing, and you lucky once in a while, you find a
[Guest]: good teacher, but then they leave and go elsewhere. In the government school, they get paid a
[Guest]: very good entry salary for a young teacher in government school is several times of the
[Guest]: per capita income of that village. But they don't teach and that's a big problem, I think,
[Guest]: because for the private or government, nobody teaches basically, people send under the illusion
[Guest]: that private schools are doing better, but they have better, you know, looks, so to speak,
[Guest]: in terms of, you know, teachers come on time and leave on time. But whether you're learning,
[Guest]: I really doubt it. So that's become a very big impediment to opportunities are there.
[Guest]: And if you had a little bit better thing going for you, more guidance, not even so much skill,
[Guest]: you know, like, if you look at like low end manufacturing, decent salaries, one of my
[Guest]: neighbors, I mean, a few not neighbor like 50 meters away from us, he got a job in escort
[Guest]: a young man, and his whole family got lifted out of difficulty because he and then he got
[Guest]: his brother also there. Then his nephew also got, you know, three people with a formal
[Guest]: sector job, their entry level only, but they got skilled in the on the job because see,
[Guest]: at entry level jobs in manufacturing, you don't need to be a very well educated person,
[Guest]: they'll train you, apprenticeship works very well. Only thing is some basic education and
[Guest]: some guidance key where to go and where to look that even that is sometimes missing this
[Guest]: is kind of a big information asymmetry, there are transaction costs that come in the way.
[Guest]: And there is, I think, if more of that would be there, then these aspirations will be fulfilled
[Guest]: in a more in a better way, but markets are working. So more or less, we'll have better
[Guest]: situation than if we had earlier, but public systems and even the private systems on education
[Guest]: and all are failing. And it's a greatest tragedy, I see, because I've grown up with these guys,
[Guest]: like who are my eyes to play with them. Now, I'm in my late 30s. They're also late 30s.
[Guest]: They have nothing, you know, like a childhood friend of mine, he drives a taxi in the village
[Guest]: from one place to another and then plies and it's a hard life. It's a very tough life.
[Guest]: It's also not a life of great dignity, because people don't treat you very well. So it's
[Guest]: a and I mean, I wouldn't say I don't know what he would have done, who knows. But I
[Guest]: mean, if just a different setting, he would have done completely different, his life would
[Guest]: have been very different. So overall Indian economy is a low middle income economy. So
[Guest]: it's not like we're a rich country. And within that, I think these failures of systems in
[Guest]: our part of the world makes it even harder.
[Guest]: Now on the politics, I mean, which is all intertwined in this, because it's like democracy
[Guest]: is working its way through India, and it's been working its way through India 77-75 years.
[Guest]: There is more or less now a sense of you know, that even in my lifetime, you know, I've born
[Guest]: about halfway into the democracies life. And I've seen like, there is much more of a sense
[Guest]: of equality people, the way people assert themselves and talk, you know, there's a much
[Guest]: more subservient sense, if you're poorer than you would assume that you are inferior, you
[Guest]: know, in that sense, forget about whether I, a person of upper caste will say that you
[Guest]: are inferior, there was a subjective sense that your place in society is such and such.
[Guest]: And that I think is so significantly changed in just last 25 years itself that I've seen.
[Guest]: Because this whole, that local myth has broken, right, like there's now boundaries are broken,
[Guest]: urbanization, capitalism, all of that has come in. And there's, it's just much more
[Guest]: of a, when people talk, they'll say, okay, we're talking with peers, you know, and there
[Guest]: is some degree of at least democratic equality is there and everybody's people vote very
[Guest]: enthusiastically in my village, like 70% types, turnouts. And in fact, India generally
[Guest]: does very well for its level of development in terms of voter turnout. It's a pretty and
[Guest]: it's improving in the last few years, so much for the death of democracy. But people are
[Guest]: voting and they're participating. And, and that's the process through which any change
[Guest]: has to happen. It's not, you may not like what they vote for, but you have to still,
[Guest]: I mean, engage with that process. That's, that's the right mechanism that we built as
[Guest]: a people. So, and that is what you see, as I said earlier, there is much more mobilization.
[Guest]: And when politicians come, there is the rallies are raucous, like, there is so much discussion
[Guest]: and so much conversation, so much questioning. And, you know, it's a, it's a very interesting
[Guest]: thing, you know, in fact, India scores very highly, even if you look at the data and all
[Guest]: of it is very highly on citizen participation in these kind of forums. So, people will go
[Guest]: like, there is a power station near my village, substation, through which other villages get
[Guest]: power. Whenever there's a power cut, if it's too long, people will go and do dharma, dharna
[Guest]: there. Once they tried to actually break it down also, it's a self-defeating kind of,
[Guest]: that was many years ago. But they will resist, they will try to fight, they will try to,
[Guest]: you know, voice their opinion. So, it's, I mean, if you're sitting in your room, and
[Guest]: you're assuming that Indian citizens are apathetic, and they're not worried about the common good
[Guest]: or association life of democracy, it's not true, simply not true, at least in my part
[Guest]: of the village, many where I've lived in many cities, I've traveled the length and
[Guest]: breadth of this country. I think it's a very, you know, we are, we are now understand that
[Guest]: we are a democracy, and we citizens more or less, to various degree, each individual has
[Guest]: a different view, think that we have a say, we, our voice is there, and we can exercise
[Guest]: it may not always work, the state is very impervious and a little opaque and often also
[Guest]: very quite low capacity. So, many things will not get done. But you go to a government office
[Guest]: is full of people trying to petition for something or the other, you know, it's full, people
[Guest]: are approaching, they have trust in institutions, they want to institutions to work better.
[Guest]: So, participation in electoral democracy is one thing, sense of democracy as a equality
[Guest]: of people is, is one thing. And then assertion with the state and demanding the state to
[Guest]: do more is also I mean, one thing. And I think in all these three, there is compared to say
[Guest]: 30 years ago or 25 years ago, I would say 25 years ago, because that's when I became
[Guest]: a teenager. So, I have a sense of what was going on a little bit before that I was a
[Guest]: very young kid. So, it's, there's a directionality is I think, I mean, much more of a spread
[Guest]: of democracy, I would say at least, and I'm talking about Eastern UP, you know, which
[Guest]: is actually a pretty underdeveloped part of the country economically, socially very conservative.
[Guest]: But look at the politics is so much churning, you can't take your seat for granted. You
[Guest]: know, you can't take, nobody can take your seat for granted, you may whatever caste,
[Guest]: you have to still come and ask for my vote, and I can vote you out. And every, every election
[Guest]: some other person wins, some other party wins, you have to still make that make that demand.
[Guest]: And then hopefully, you will be honoured with my vote or you will not be.
[Amit Varma]: So before I ask my next big question, a small question, quick question. When you meet your
[Amit Varma]: old friend who now drives a taxi and your childhood friend, what do you talk about?
[Guest]: We talk about whatever is, he has a kid. So I talk about his kid, his family or we talk
[Guest]: as friends. I mean, it has nothing to do with anything else. Like, I mean, he has, I mean,
[Guest]: we are friends, there's nothing else to, so he lives in the, he's from a poor Brahmin
[Guest]: family. They don't have any land. So his elder brother did migrate and earned some, but he
[Guest]: never settled down in the city, because he never made it big. So he remained, he didn't
[Guest]: get any skills. So he goes and comes back, goes and comes back. So his elder brother's
[Guest]: family also lives in the village and his family and he live in the village. And they have
[Guest]: a small house near our, where I used to go and he used to come to our house. It's basically
[Guest]: like 20 steps or something from my house. And so when we talk, we talk about what's
[Guest]: going on in the village. He asked me about my life in the city. And, you know, let's
[Guest]: we go to our, to the farm and we walk around. I mean, there's no grand theme in the conversation,
[Guest]: right? It's just a, you know, like,
[Amit Varma]: But do you sense a sadness or a bitterness or a regret on his part that
[Guest]: Yeah, so I think, so he, let me be very clear, he wasn't very good at studies. So his expectations
[Guest]: were very modest. I mean, he got into bad company at a young age or whatever. But even
[Guest]: then he would have at least he got a job in a factory, you know, he did high school and
[Guest]: all of that, that didn't happen, you know, and after you miss the bus, you miss the bus,
[Guest]: you know, at that time, and I also didn't have the way to, you know, get help him at
[Guest]: that time, we were roughly the same age, he's slightly older. So then he took this path,
[Guest]: he started driving, he was driving with the big auto that you have there, you know, like,
[Guest]: which can have 25 people inside it, then he started driving a taxi, he's trying to drive,
[Guest]: buy a car and basically drive his own car. There is some sense of what you call, see,
[Guest]: the good thing about the village life is that your basic consumption is not to be worried
[Guest]: about. If you're living in the village, and you have a little bit of cash, you'll be okay,
[Guest]: you don't have to pay rent, you know, you don't have to say, so there is that. So it's
[Guest]: like the city, city poor can be very, very harsh life, you know, very harsh, like you
[Guest]: can, why do people just walk back to their villages, you know, because this whole city
[Guest]: ecosystem is very cash intensive. Everything is paid for, you have to pay for the rent,
[Guest]: you have to pay for the power, you have to pay for water, everything you have to pay
[Guest]: for. And if your cash flow stops one day, you're done, you can't stay here for one minute
[Guest]: or two. And anybody who knows India knows this, the reality of India. So people just
[Guest]: literally walk back, there's no train, there's no bus, I'll just walk back to home because
[Guest]: there was urban poverty, rural poverty, and he's not, I mean, very poor, right? He has
[Guest]: some income, his brother also owns a little in the city and sends a little bit of money
[Guest]: back to his family. So he has got some sense of, I mean, stability in that. But yeah, there
[Guest]: is always once in a while that conversation about the counterfactual that what if he had
[Guest]: got a job in a factory. He did try, he went to Kerala once, but he couldn't make it there.
[Guest]: He tried to go to Gulf once, but that didn't work out. He was almost scammed, he got the
[Guest]: money back eventually. But so these things they've tried, I mean, everybody tries these
[Guest]: things in my part of the, sometimes it works, sometimes it don't, it doesn't. But if you
[Guest]: look at overall the number of people who have been able to be mobile economically compared
[Guest]: to say 30 years ago, it's not even close, it's not even close. Earlier, it was just
[Guest]: a few small people who could get good education. Some who could just deal with the hardship
[Guest]: of I mean, the limited opportunities that are there basically in Bombay and a couple
[Guest]: of other places. Now it's just spread out. There are some people who go to Gujarat also
[Guest]: now and earlier that wasn't at all a migration pipe from my part. Like Odisha to Gujarat
[Guest]: pipe is very well known, South Gujarat, South Ayushan to Gujarat is quite significant. So
[Guest]: there are these like, but now it's very spread out and people are trying to find opportunities
[Guest]: and it's a hard life. It's a very hard life, because you have to live away from the family.
[Guest]: That's a very tough thing because you can't, there's no, when you're seasonal migration,
[Guest]: you can't really take your family to eat up all your resources. So it's a very tough life.
[Guest]: But once you make it there, then you settle down and then you are an amphibian.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting how language evolves, like people call people from UP who come to
[Amit Varma]: Bombay, they're typically called bhaiyas, right? So once we had a domestic help at home,
[Amit Varma]: and we asked her where she's from, and she said, main to bhaiyan hoon, which was an interesting
[Amit Varma]: evolution of the language. So the next big question that I want to drill down on is what
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned earlier, where you spoke about teachers, that your father was lucky that
[Amit Varma]: he had good teachers, and how most teachers are going through the motions and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And what you meant by good teachers, I'm guessing was not someone who is teaching the syllabus
[Amit Varma]: well, you know, ki geography achche se para diya, ya math achche se para diya. There's
[Amit Varma]: something else you meant by teacher, that, you know, you spoke about the virtues of it,
[Amit Varma]: that aspect of it of how a good teacher can lift you. So a good teacher in that sense
[Amit Varma]: is not just teaching you what's in the syllabus, in a sense, he's within the system, but he's
[Amit Varma]: also standing outside the system. He's, in a sense, helping shape your character, showing
[Amit Varma]: you something that you may not otherwise see. So can you elaborate on this for me, both
[Amit Varma]: in the microcosmic context of that particular village, and you know, what your father may
[Amit Varma]: have picked up from those teachers or what you may have picked up later from teachers
[Amit Varma]: who inspired you? And can you and that's a microcosmic context, but also a broader context,
[Amit Varma]: that everybody needs teachers in their lives, right? And most of us, if we are fortunate,
[Amit Varma]: we'll probably find we might find teachers who are actually in that official position
[Amit Varma]: of authority in a school or a college, or we might find teachers elsewhere in life mentors
[Amit Varma]: or people who teach us things and all of that. So elaborate a little bit on both these microcosmic
[Amit Varma]: and macrocosmic aspects. And in the macrocosmic aspect, perhaps even, you know, a sense of
[Amit Varma]: that, do you sometimes feel that you have a responsibility also, to pay it back not
[Amit Varma]: in a formal sense, but in the sense of if you have something to teach, if you can touch
[Amit Varma]: somebody's life in some way, that lifts him a little bit that you should do that. So take
[Amit Varma]: me through all of this, a big question, I know.
[Guest]: Yeah, it is a big question. It's about life itself. So I think, so there was a teacher
[Guest]: in my father's school before he went to school, this is a story that he heard, who used to
[Guest]: insist when it came to the 10th standard that the bottom third of the class in the 9th standard,
[Guest]: he will teach. And then he would use to produce good results from them in 10th. He said, this
[Guest]: is my duty that I will take the worst performing third on the 9th standard, or fourth or third,
[Guest]: whatever, but the basically the people who are doing very badly. And then he will make
[Guest]: it his life's mission to spend a year with them and basically prove that you know, there's
[Guest]: nothing wrong with the kids is basically, you know, you as a teacher can do a lot, even
[Guest]: if there's something wrong, there's a long, big dent that a teacher can make, you know,
[Guest]: a good teacher. It should be all consuming, right? It's a very intensive process, not
[Guest]: just going through the class. Lots of kids require special attention, you have to spend
[Guest]: a lot of time after the class and to keep track of this. So one story that a friend
[Guest]: of mine who's a very senior civil servant in the government now, he told me that when
[Guest]: he was in school, he was in 11th standard or entered just 12th standard, his teacher
[Guest]: called him home. Okay. And she gave him a piece of paper in which the list of top 100
[Guest]: of CBSE in CBSE exam, the students was given. And he said, this is the list of people who
[Guest]: came in the top 100 this year, you need to be on it next year, what do I need to do to
[Guest]: make sure that happens? You know, and, and he did, he came in top 20 in the country.
[Guest]: So I went to St. Stephen's and all of that. And I mean, but he's, yeah, he's a great guy.
[Guest]: So now do two different categories. One is this guy who says, okay, I'm going to raise
[Guest]: a large number of kids who are not doing well to a level of standard in which they're able
[Guest]: to get through the 10th, you know, and then they will find a path, hopefully forward.
[Guest]: And then there is the other, where you point at a few kids who just need a little bit,
[Guest]: you know, special attention to go that extra mile and basically get to a completely different
[Guest]: league, right? So teaching involves both of these things. I've not really done teaching
[Guest]: in my life, but I have been on the other side of the racing that you need both. I mean,
[Guest]: you need to be in a larger setting in which education is happening and whatever, or learning
[Guest]: is considered to be a good, to be an important thing and it's being pursued. And sometimes
[Guest]: in life, you need somebody to give you that extra push, you know, where you're lost and
[Guest]: you don't know where you're headed, you need guidance, you need mentorship. And more than
[Guest]: that, you just need emotional support, you know, that, yes, I have faith in you, you
[Guest]: don't have faith in me, you know, and that actually, you know, I, it's kind of a preference
[Guest]: that is there inside the person, you know, who's the teacher. And I'm not one of those
[Guest]: believers, I have a lot of long standing debates with friends about incentives and all shaping
[Guest]: it. These are virtues that actually people basically, the combination of factors, perhaps
[Guest]: something to do with their childhood, how they socialize, how they saw they got into
[Guest]: this profession, and how they saw it as a meaning of their life, you know, in that sense,
[Guest]: how they saw. So we can talk about the philosophical framing of it, like the way Alessandra McIntyre
[Guest]: and all of these guys have done about how to think about virtues. But it's something
[Guest]: which is which happens, I mean, I would say upstream of the markets, in some senses, you
[Guest]: know, it happens. And then these are the preferences, which then the market can take and do whatever
[Guest]: it wants to do with it, it can reward them or punish them as well in certain circumstances.
[Guest]: Like there are situations in markets punish bad behavior, because a good doctor may take
[Guest]: a long time to treat a patient. And the markets may, I mean, the way the hospital corporates
[Guest]: are set up, they may want to do it in a quick way, so that you have a lot of people are
[Guest]: being churned out quickly. So and then there is a conflict between virtues and the working
[Guest]: of the market in that particular setting, you know, markets also have work in segmented
[Guest]: way, you may find a good segment in which you are actually the best place, because that
[Guest]: segment rewards this kind of a performance with respect to your patients, patient.
[Guest]: So I think what you need, especially in a country like India, where you have still a
[Guest]: long way to go, we are quite poor, you know, we are a lower middle income country, is that
[Guest]: you need to basically have lots of teachers who are, who have at least raised the basic
[Guest]: standard up, you know, like, do the basic thing that teach the kids on a regular basis,
[Guest]: get them to a minimum standard, and then they'll find it. And then you will have a few who
[Guest]: just go above and beyond. And they say that I'm going to give my life to it in some senses.
[Guest]: And for that, you need, I mean, I don't know how that is done, you know, because I've seen
[Guest]: I've, I've been lucky to have some mentors in my life, like, maybe it'll make them uncomfortable
[Guest]: if I name them here. But there are people who have touched my life in very important
[Guest]: way. My father was one, my mother, my, my, my uncle, I said,
[Amit Varma]: Can you elaborate a bit on each of those? Actually, I'm very interested in the ways
[Amit Varma]: that they shaped you.
[Guest]: So my father was a heroic figure, right? He came from a, he had a hero's journey from
[Guest]: the village to a city and he settled down here, he, he got an education, he got a decent
[Guest]: stable job. In his 40s, he did his PhD, again from BHU. And then after the retirement, he
[Guest]: goes out and helps kids who are really hungry for guidance and support and all of that.
[Guest]: My some of them may not be very comfortable. I talk about them in public. My uncle, I told
[Guest]: you how much my uncle and aunt both how they took control of their family took charge and
[Guest]: how basically they saved the family from utter ruin. Utter ruin, you know, it would have
[Guest]: been a complete ruin if they hadn't performed their duties at that time. And in fact, it
[Guest]: was a very difficult time generally for the for our village. There was one year in which
[Guest]: there was a major drought. For two consecutive, there was a major drought. He literally had
[Guest]: to walk for 50 kilometers to be able to get some help from a distant family, you know,
[Guest]: walk with up they took a bullock cart and all. It's part of our family lore. And I mean,
[Guest]: he's the kind of person so I remember I went to village once and I had a Spanish Ark beer
[Guest]: and he saw it and said, this won't do. I immediately removed it. There was a question that I want
[Guest]: to debate with him. It's my right or whatever. He didn't like a Spanish Ark beer. He said,
[Guest]: this one, this is not looking good.
[Amit Varma]: I know a French beard. What's a Spanish Ark beard?
[Guest]: There's a basically like a small arc that you make below your chin. So you can look
[Guest]: it up. So I was a teenager and I said, Okay, let me try a different look. And I landed
[Guest]: in a village and he said, this is not looking good on you. This is not going to do. I just
[Guest]: removed it. A lot of fear. I just loved him, you know, that I had a sense that this is
[Guest]: I come from these people, you know, and whatever I am is because of these people and my father
[Guest]: and my mother, my uncle and my aunt and I have a written history of eight generations
[Guest]: back and I know the stories and how much it takes to keep a family together to have to
[Guest]: stabilize in this world, especially in a poor country, you know, we were poor at that time.
[Guest]: Now we're low middle income country. It's hard, especially in that Eastern UP and Bihar
[Guest]: context. So there is a sense of my mother's side, for example, my Nana ji was like that.
[Guest]: He also came from a village and he became a teacher. He was a college teacher in Agra
[Guest]: and he came from Eastern UP again from Azamgarh and he was again a very, very amazing person,
[Guest]: you know, he did his PhD and all of that. He became a teacher. He wrote a book, which
[Guest]: is still going on in Hindi book on research methods, which is still in circulation as
[Guest]: in taught. I have a copy of that book, very nicely written book. Anusandhan Parichay.
[Guest]: So it's an introduction to research methods. So, and he came from a, he used to teach in
[Guest]: a village school and then he got into college and then he did his PhD and became a professor
[Guest]: and all of that. Very happy man, you know, one of the happiest persons I've ever met.
[Guest]: Always smiling, always laughing, always joking, always trying to make everybody very happy.
[Guest]: He passed away many years ago, but I was like, he passed away 15 years ago. Yeah. So I was
[Guest]: not that young, I was still in 20s. So he, he was also like that. And many of the stories
[Guest]: of people who actually make these difficult journeys, you know, and are like, and each
[Guest]: family has this, you know, like, these are the great heroes, you know, and they are,
[Guest]: they live private lives. And their heroism is basically limited to the, to serving the
[Guest]: immediate good, which is the good of the family and the friends and the communities, you know.
[Guest]: He started a school back in his village, which ran for many years. I don't know whether it's
[Guest]: still running. In fact, that part of my family, my mother's side has left the village. So
[Guest]: the village home is literally logged now, because everybody moved to the city. So another
[Guest]: one logged home. So he was there. And when I was in school, I had a few teachers who
[Guest]: really helped me out. I, when I started working, I mean, I had last 11-12 years, I've had a
[Guest]: number of mentors, not a number, a few really good mentors, who I look up to, they're very
[Guest]: virtuous people. Especially one person, I will not name him, you know him. He's an economist.
[Guest]: I don't want to embarrass him. But I really look up to him as someone, a very decent human
[Guest]: being, you know, and very good person to learn from, not just economics, but also about life
[Guest]: and things in general, and consistently good person. I've known him for not 12 years. And
[Guest]: I've never had a feeling about him that there is something, what you see is what you get
[Guest]: with him. It's a very, very, very interesting, very good thing to have in a mentor. So, yeah,
[Guest]: I think it's a very, so this is how societies improve, I think, like one person at another
[Guest]: time, and you go through an internal process. In some ways, I've improved as a person over
[Guest]: the last 10 years. And I'm trying to get better, you know, and it's a journey that you go through
[Guest]: internally and others can help you, you know. And there is a very important role that others
[Guest]: can play. In that sense, we are not completely isolated human beings, we are very open to
[Guest]: influence, but not lecturing. In subtle ways, you know, like Jung has this insight on how,
[Guest]: if you want to change somebody, then, you know, Gandhi also had the same insight that
[Guest]: you want to be the change. I think it's a misquote, he didn't say that, but it's often
[Guest]: attributed to him, is that, you know, you have to be the change, you have to see the
[Guest]: world. Similarly, Jung has a very interesting portion in one of his last books, Undiscovered
[Guest]: Self, where he writes about how in some tribes that he was observing in the Pacific Islands,
[Guest]: it was this, there was a term, I forget this term, it was called, it'll come to me. It
[Guest]: was basically a quality of a person that you just watch him and observe him and try to,
[Guest]: you know, don't copy his bannerisms, just try to, you know, take his character in some
[Guest]: ways, you know, in some senses, it's almost like a mystical participation in that person's
[Guest]: personality. And you're trying to, and that's the way to, you know, lecturing and hectoring
[Guest]: is not the way any human being changes, it puts us in a defensive mode. It's much more
[Guest]: of a, we learn and get better by observing others who are better than us. One of my favorite
[Guest]: examples on this is this Nathaniel Hawthorne, who was a great, great author. And I loved
[Guest]: love his work. And he was one of the great thinkers on human nature and very, very humane
[Guest]: kind of a writer. And there's a book called The Life of Marianne. Oh, this very young
[Guest]: girl who was stricken by cancer and she passed away at a very young age. And there was a
[Guest]: convent in which she was being taken care of. And the convent basically took care of
[Guest]: only cancer stricken or very badly sick kids. And this young girl was very, very, what you
[Guest]: call, was considered to be a bundle of joy and very wiser than her age, basically nine
[Guest]: or eight or nine years of age, very wise, and made everybody very happy. And of course,
[Guest]: she passed away later. So, then the nuns from that convent came to Flannery O'Connor, who's
[Guest]: also a great southern writer, America, really great writer. I love her work and said, why
[Guest]: don't you write her life? So, Flannery said, I am in no position to write any life of a
[Guest]: person I didn't know, but she sounded like a perfect, great, great person and you should
[Guest]: write it, the nuns should write it. And I'll happily write a foreword to it. So, in the
[Guest]: foreword she writes actually very interestingly, it's a very interesting life to read about,
[Guest]: her foreword is also more interesting, is how Nathaniel Hawthorne, who was a very humane
[Guest]: person who wrote a number of very interesting stories about human life and dignity of human
[Guest]: life and the beauty of imperfection and I mean, basically the antithesis to the Aldous
[Guest]: Huxley's, you know, utopia of trying to make best human being by taking chemicals and by
[Guest]: doing genetic engineering and all that, taking human life as it is. And his daughter started
[Guest]: this convent. And in a way, she draws a line between one of his stories, Hawthorne's stories
[Guest]: and the life path that his daughter took when she started the convent to take care of young
[Guest]: stricken children who were terminally ill. And then how this little kid who got a good
[Guest]: life, even though short life, a good life in a convent because of that. So, I think
[Guest]: that is the main thing that I have learned more recently in life, I wish I had learned
[Guest]: it earlier is that, you know, the big ideas and the abstract thinking and discussions
[Guest]: and great grand ideologies are one thing and maybe in some context, they are useful. But
[Guest]: the most important thing is to, you know, nurture these ways of improving things, whether
[Guest]: it is in professions, different professions, in which good virtuous professionals can create
[Guest]: role models for others and help others and aid others, whether it is within families,
[Guest]: you know, how to be a good father and how to be a good mother. It is not easy, none
[Guest]: of this is easy, not easy to be a good professional, not easy to be a good parent, not easy to
[Guest]: be a good professional, good worker, good politician or anything like that. All of that
[Guest]: is challenging because there are so many necessities, quote unquote, and demands. But I think that
[Guest]: is the main thing that needs to sustain, there is a hidden thing which we do not see in the,
[Guest]: because it is kind of a quality which is not easily captured. But that is a hidden thing
[Guest]: that makes a civilization, country great and other things can flow from there, other utilities
[Guest]: can flow from there. But this kind of a continuity of good, you know, that and that is it. So
[Guest]: I think that is the way I draw the arc in teaching and life and all of that.
[Guest]: How important
[Amit Varma]: Does that answer your question or I went on and on?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, a lot of my guests say this to me, does that answer your question? Thereby
[Amit Varma]: kind of missing the point in the sense that the answer to the question is not the point,
[Amit Varma]: but the thoughts that can spark other points. So, I certainly found it very illuminating
[Amit Varma]: and it, I think did its job of giving me more questions to ask. The first of which is this,
[Amit Varma]: how important to you is the rootedness which you feel? Like you mentioned, that you know
[Amit Varma]: the genealogy of your family going back a long way, that you feel rooted in that village,
[Amit Varma]: you know, your friends are still there, your family is still there, all of that, and you
[Amit Varma]: carry that with you. And I'm guessing part of that rootedness is not just a memory of
[Amit Varma]: people or a sense of place, but also this bedrock of values that, you know, you carry
[Amit Varma]: with you. And I see myself in a sense in contrast to that, that I don't really feel that rooted.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a loss, it's something that I bemoan, that I do feel, you know, deracinated. And
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I see, I embrace the positive aspects of what comes out of that, the fact that I
[Amit Varma]: feel like a citizen of the world, I take ideas from everywhere, my influences are from everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: But I also see the loss that there is. And maybe you and I are sitting here, and you
[Amit Varma]: are an extremely rooted person, and I'm not. And maybe it's a good time for you to sort
[Amit Varma]: of talk about what you feel your rootedness brought you in terms of the way you think
[Amit Varma]: and the way you see the world, and how it would be different from somebody like me,
[Amit Varma]: like what is perhaps then lacking in my vision, like one of the themes that I've looked at
[Amit Varma]: in past episodes also, is that many of our English speaking elites, like myself, grew
[Amit Varma]: up in this small urban bubble, where we looked at the country the wrong way, we didn't really
[Amit Varma]: know this country, right. And one way of reacting to understanding the country when we do see
[Amit Varma]: it, see it a little better, is to perhaps swing to a negative extreme, like I might
[Amit Varma]: sometimes have done and say, Oh, we are so bigoted, we are so illiberal, we are so this,
[Amit Varma]: we are so that, right, which also might be an overreaction to whatever. But, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so just going back to that sense of what does rootedness bring you? And what do you think
[Amit Varma]: the absence of that rootedness does to somebody?
[Guest]: As I said that, my family lives across many centuries at the same time. So there is, of
[Guest]: course, some rootedness that I feel and I, it's just a, I know where I come from, more
[Guest]: or less. My family has been in that one spot for 400 years, same house, same place as house
[Guest]: has been 400 years, it's been made, built and rebuilt many times. We have a written
[Guest]: record of eight generations, we have some sense of who we are, but it only goes some
[Guest]: way, you know, it's, it's just a sense of gratitude that, okay, there are people who
[Guest]: started the family, who kept it together, who continued the kind of values that went
[Guest]: into our family, who had different difficult junctures, kept things together when they
[Guest]: could have fallen apart, they kept the center held, so to speak. And there is that.
[Guest]: But if you look at me, I actually, a lot of what I have learned is not just, I mean, that's
[Guest]: the base, like, I would say that's the bedrock. And then you go and it's great, right, to
[Guest]: be in the modern world, you can read and think and talk about, talk to anyone, you can learn
[Guest]: from many, many sources. See, one word that I always grew up hearing is dharma, dharma,
[Guest]: dharma. It's like, okay, what's dharma, it's difficult to define, but you know, it's a,
[Guest]: it's a basically a way of thinking about what is the right thing to do, you know, and what
[Guest]: would work in some sense. And then you need to learn, you know, it's not, there's no substitute
[Guest]: for practical judgment. And practical judgment requires learning from many, many sources.
[Guest]: And for that, you need to be able to open and I mean, you know, it's not like I figured
[Guest]: things out, I'm still struggling and learning and trying to get better at what I do, whatever
[Guest]: I do. And that, for that the sources are many, right. But I got basic set of, you know, starting
[Guest]: because of my, what my father did, my uncle did, and others may have done. And that's
[Guest]: my past. And that's my history. And I'm very cognizant of that. Not a day goes by before
[Guest]: I feel gratitude for what they've done for me in some sense. Because, but because of
[Guest]: the way I am in my family, nobody ever talks about this stuff. I'm sitting here and talking
[Guest]: about it in a podcast. But I've never ever said this to anyone in my family because that's
[Guest]: not the way we are, you know, we're not over the top over these things. I never hugged
[Guest]: my uncle and said, hey, thank you so much for what you did for me. Because
[Amit Varma]: But he shaved your funky Spanish beard.
[Guest]: Yeah, those are small ways in which one makes it clear that what matters and what doesn't.
[Guest]: So it was not my right to keep a beard was certainly not at the top of my mind. It wasn't
[Guest]: much of a demand, you know, I remember when my I got married, within a year, my wife had
[Guest]: to, we had to go to higher studies in the US. And my uncle was one of the first ones
[Guest]: to support it. You know, he's a 75 year old man living in a village. And within a year
[Guest]: of a village, I mean, so called daughter-in-law of the family is going abroad for a few years
[Guest]: to study. And he was the first to support it, you know, because and he's the guy who
[Guest]: for 30 years ago, I remember had very, very conservative views, not just for job or even
[Guest]: on education, only teaching job is good, all of that is good. And so I mean, there are
[Guest]: people who earn respect, you know, in some senses, because they act according to situation
[Guest]: they learn, they change, and they do what's good in many ways. So I'm very grateful for
[Guest]: all that, that I mean, a certain kind of in fact, I wish I was able to make more of what
[Guest]: I got from them, you know, it is my own feeling that I'm not a better person or a more virtuous
[Guest]: person. I'm not done more contribute in many ways, you know, it is my own feeling and I
[Guest]: could do more. And to be able to do more one has to actually expand, you know, it has to
[Guest]: venture out and understand how things work, learn and you know, it's a, but it's the love
[Guest]: that one gets from there. Like one of my favorite quotes is from Chesterton, that he wrote somewhere
[Guest]: that Romans didn't love Rome because Rome was great. Rome was great because Romans loved
[Guest]: Rome, you know. So, and that's the foundation. I mean, one loves one family, one village,
[Guest]: one community, one country, even if they have done you some harm, you know, and they may
[Guest]: have like, we've been betrayed so many times as a family by others in our village, there
[Guest]: have been violence, there are a number of court cases going on. I mean, in fact, one
[Guest]: member of the family is always fighting court cases, designated that this person will go
[Guest]: and appear in the court. So much conflict, violence, all of that has happened, but we
[Guest]: still, this is our village, this is our family, we love each other. And there is a tension
[Guest]: and conflict with that, all that happens. So, then the question comes how to make Rome
[Guest]: great. And for that you need to be, you know, the past is not a great guide, it's just a
[Guest]: little bit you get from there, a sense of rootedness. And there actually, in some ways
[Guest]: people like you have more advantages because you are much more seeing and learning and
[Guest]: I learn a lot from you and others, like my friend, friends in the economics side. I'm
[Guest]: not an economist, but I learn a lot from economists, political scientists, I learn a lot from different
[Guest]: people and say, because my work is in political economy. So, I try to learn as much as I can
[Guest]: to be able to say how we can, how the Indian economy can grow better, how can we do better.
[Guest]: Similarly, I work a little bit on professions. So, I learn, in fact, my main thinking on
[Guest]: professions initiated by Alasdair MacIntyre, who is a, I mean, completely rooted in the
[Guest]: Western tradition of philosophy, Aristotelian and Thomist and you know that tradition. But
[Guest]: one can actually learn from many, many places because dharma is universal, you know, and
[Guest]: there is a, I mean, it is not something which is a monopoly of a particular people. In fact,
[Guest]: that's, that would be the completely wrong way of thinking about it. It's about what
[Guest]: you, how you think about the world and what you do. And there, actually, you see a lot
[Guest]: of dharma all over the world in many ways and one has to be able to learn and see what
[Guest]: is, what would work, you know, what would be practically the right thing to do and morally
[Guest]: also the right thing to do at the same time. That's the combination that you need to be
[Guest]: able to do. And for that, being open, learning from the world, understanding things from
[Guest]: different perspectives, you know, because you don't see, from your perspective is only
[Guest]: one side of the mountain and there are other sides of the mountain. So, you need to talk
[Guest]: to others, learn, you know, you need to wake up with the moderns, spend the day with the
[Guest]: medievals, retire with the ancients, you know, and have a sense of all encompassing perspective
[Guest]: to form a world view and then contribute. That's in the world of think tanks and intellectualism
[Guest]: as in where I am. But suppose you are working in a bank, you can still feel rooted in your
[Guest]: family, but you still have to be a good banker, right? You need to figure out how to do banking
[Guest]: well, how to be a good banker. If you are a teacher, you have to do that. Whether you
[Guest]: are a, if you are a civil servant, you still have to figure it out. But the love for this
[Guest]: land or this people, we as a people and our whole long history of common suffering and
[Guest]: struggles and the way we have come is the root on which all of that stands, basically.
[Guest]: That's the way I look at it. That root is not the future, but that is where we come
[Guest]: from.
[Amit Varma]: So, I want to now move to the question of virtue and there are many angles to it, but
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to start with the personal angle in the sense that, you know, one question
[Amit Varma]: that I ask myself a lot is how should we live our lives, right? How do we live our lives?
[Amit Varma]: How do we think about what is the right thing to do and what is the wrong thing to do? And
[Amit Varma]: I think how we come up upon it early in life is there's a conventional way of thinking
[Amit Varma]: this is good, that is bad and we kind of go by that. And of course, you know, we are hardwired
[Amit Varma]: in certain ways with different sort of codes, which often conflict with each other. There's
[Amit Varma]: a great book by Robert Wright called The Moral Animal, which kind of talks about some of
[Amit Varma]: this and that's one sort of way of looking at it. But, you know, those are knobs that
[Amit Varma]: nature gives you and nurture turns them and nurture turns them in different ways where
[Amit Varma]: you pick up values from your immediate surroundings. You know, religion is one codification of
[Amit Varma]: it, but that's also diffuse and contextual. But then there comes a time where you actually
[Amit Varma]: start thinking about it, where you go beyond your broad moral instincts, as it were, and
[Amit Varma]: you start thinking about, you know, what is a good way to live one's life? And why is
[Amit Varma]: it a good way to live one's life? And start thinking along those terms. So what's sort
[Amit Varma]: of your journey been towards? And I asked you this question, I won't ask many others
[Amit Varma]: this question, but I asked you this question, because I know you've thought about this deeply
[Amit Varma]: read about it deeply done that self reflection. And it's something I struggle with in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that struggle with in the sense that it's an ongoing journey, obviously, for everyone.
[Amit Varma]: But so I'd be very interested in knowing what was your intellectual journey towards, you
[Amit Varma]: know, figuring out what one should do, like we've been using the term dharma. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, we can talk about it in the context of professions after this. But first, I kind
[Amit Varma]: of want to focus on the personal, that when it comes to your dharma as a person, or perhaps
[Amit Varma]: broken into roles, your dharma towards your family or dharma towards your wife and kids
[Amit Varma]: and so on, you know, how have you thought about it? Who are the writers? What are the
[Amit Varma]: books that have shaped your thinking on this? And what are the lessons that you feel you've
[Amit Varma]: learned in time?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I don't think this is an intellectual kind of exercise. I mean, one reads about
[Guest]: these things, but I think it's much more of an experiential thing. And one has to engage
[Guest]: with one's situations and try to do the best one can. And sometimes one can get it wrong.
[Guest]: Sometimes one can get it right. And later you realize whether you got it wrong or right.
[Guest]: But yeah, I think reading and thinking about these things helps talking about these things
[Guest]: also helps. So I the way I see human life is basically there are different phases in
[Guest]: which look backwards and you see what what what is going on. It's not when you're living
[Guest]: it. So basically, when you get into this world, initially, you're a family person, like in
[Guest]: many ways, your behavior is shaped by your family in significant ways and your friends
[Guest]: in a circle in which you find yourself, your teachers and all of that, then you have to
[Guest]: make a place for yourself in this world. So you enter into the educational and professional
[Guest]: realm and you start working or start business or whatever it is that you want to do, you
[Guest]: get into politics. At that time, you're playing a game, right? Because the what is the game
[Guest]: that there is some situation that you find yourself and you want to get ahead, right?
[Guest]: And that's the game you played basically, at least in the middle age, you know, and
[Guest]: within that game, if you're not playing a game, then it's a completely different world.
[Guest]: If you just kind of like some people do at a young age, they decide that the spiritual
[Guest]: path is for them and they basically take sannyas. There is a small number who do that in India
[Guest]: even now. Other traditions also, there is a very small number that that used to do that.
[Guest]: But otherwise, you're in a game, you are basically, if you're in politics, you want to get ahead
[Guest]: in politics. If you're in a corporate setting, you want to get ahead in politics. And then
[Guest]: in certain qualities of your life get accentuated and other qualities get suppressed in the
[Guest]: process. You know, to some extent, you can have this, you know, both ways a little bit
[Guest]: five days you work and two days you do whatever, you know, weekends. But more or less, I mean,
[Guest]: that's talking about our, many people don't have that luxury also, there's hardly a weekend.
[Guest]: But the structure is the same that there is a period in which you are basically trying
[Guest]: to find a footing in your life and trying to find a place in this world. And you are
[Guest]: playing a particular, to repeat myself, game in which you find yourself, right? You entered,
[Guest]: you did an MBA or whatever, you got into a job, and then you're trying to get ahead.
[Guest]: In that, I mean, you may have a sense of right and wrong. But in many ways, you find yourself
[Guest]: in a situation in which it's very expensive, and then you have to take a decision. And
[Guest]: then those decisions can be hard. If you're lucky, you will not have to take those decisions
[Guest]: and you will find yourself walking a path of virtue and something which keeps you and
[Guest]: your moral sense, pride, your conscience is not suppressed too much and you keep walking
[Guest]: that path and you still do well. But in their situation, which you have to actually pay
[Guest]: a price for that. So the point I'm trying to make here is that it is not just about
[Guest]: you sitting in a room and deciding what is virtue and what is not. It is more experiential
[Guest]: and you are actually interacting with the real world and dealing with situations and
[Guest]: trying to say what would work and what would. So there is a kind of dialectic between virtue
[Guest]: and success and there is sometimes they go together very well and more often than not.
[Guest]: And so the point I'm trying to make is that two journeys happening at the same time. One
[Guest]: is the journey which is of you being a person in this world trying to find a place for in
[Guest]: this world. You have a family, you may not have a family, you are trying to make a career
[Guest]: of whatever kind you want to do and there is a journey. A young person, you don't know
[Guest]: what the world is like, you are uncertain how much the world will accommodate you. So
[Guest]: you accommodate a lot of the world, right? You try to adjust yourself to a significant
[Guest]: extent and if you're lucky, you will continue to be virtuous and get ahead and your sense
[Guest]: of yourself, your own righteousness and what is required to be done will not be unmatched
[Guest]: much.
[Guest]: But often there are compromises. Then you get to something like a middle age, you know
[Guest]: where at that point you need to actually because you've at least in our setting not universally
[Guest]: true but in many, we will find some kind of a footing, right? Like after 15, 16, 20 years
[Guest]: of working, you'll find some kind of footing, you've got some sense of who you are and all
[Guest]: of that. At that time it's important to say what did you suppress? What all that you actually
[Guest]: compromised? What got hidden inside you, you know? And then you need to deal with that
[Guest]: and then there is another rediscovery at that time and that's where I think the most important
[Guest]: obligation comes in that you actually start living your life at that stage. That is your
[Guest]: life, that in a way you have a better sense of who you are and you have an obligation
[Guest]: to have a better sense of who you are because in some ways you've done that bulk of the
[Guest]: Maya part that you played those games and you've done whatever to the extent keeping
[Guest]: your conscience alive and then the real moral obligation start that now you need to have
[Guest]: a very clear sense of who you are and what is the right thing to do and all of that.
[Guest]: So when you are younger, the obligation is not so much on you. It's about people around
[Guest]: you much more, you know? So again, I always think in a social sense, it's not myself as
[Guest]: an individual isolated way. So when I was 22 years old, if I got something wrong, it
[Guest]: is the elder near me who should have known better to tell me or guide me or whatever
[Guest]: or I'll just say I was unlucky. I didn't have a good better sense of what is right or wrong.
[Guest]: As 42, I don't have that luxury. I'm not 42. But when I'm 42 years old, then one has to
[Guest]: go away, you know, like always said that at 50 everybody deserves a face they have like
[Guest]: at 50, everybody deserves a character, you know, that's the character they have actually
[Guest]: in a way chosen to have. So then you actually have to ask this question. And I think more
[Guest]: and more I'm thinking about it is in terms of trying to find a way in which you you're
[Guest]: more cautiously driven by some values, you know, and that's those values can be I mean,
[Guest]: it depends on where you are situated. But broadly speaking, there has to be some sense
[Guest]: of virtues, you know, that, okay, this, this is what the right thing to do. These are the
[Guest]: broad kind of markers of what right and wrong are in my setting. And I'll try to follow
[Guest]: those. So, for example, if you're in the intellectual world, some commitment to truth is very important.
[Guest]: Some open mindedness is very important. Some sense of rigor, some bit of rigor is important,
[Guest]: depending on the purpose and the timeliness within which you're working on whatever it
[Guest]: is trying to find out some kind of a social commitment in terms of that you are not just
[Guest]: doing this for your own sake. But actually, there are some consequences that are going
[Guest]: to flow. All those are important, you know, in that sense in the work life. Similarly,
[Guest]: there are obligations that you feel and the virtues towards your family, towards your
[Guest]: spouse and your children and your parents and all of that. And as a situation comes,
[Guest]: it can I mean, you'll have to then make a decision about how to how to approach it in
[Guest]: a way that is that is the right thing to do. But one thing to always keep in mind is that
[Guest]: you will always fail. You will always fail. And it is important to try to get up and still
[Guest]: try to do better the next day, you know. And the only thing is that by the end of your
[Guest]: life, you should try to be as good as one can be. There's a journey. If you're unlucky,
[Guest]: you'll die young. Okay, that's one. But towards the end of the life, you should try to be
[Guest]: you know, there's a great Catholic writer who wrote, I think it was Catholic, who wrote
[Guest]: that, you know, the only tragedy of life is if you don't die as a saint. You know, so
[Guest]: something to that effect that at the end you should, you know, all that things about playing
[Guest]: the games of the world and trying to compromise all of that and not have not knowing what's
[Guest]: the right thing to do, all those issues should fall apart, fall away. And what should matter
[Guest]: is what is good. And it's a great tragedy if you see someone who's at an advanced age
[Guest]: has seen this world, lived through many ups and downs and made a place on the world, but
[Guest]: still haven't figured out what being a saint is like, you know, and don't have that sense.
[Guest]: There's a very interesting story by Isaac Singer, Gimple the Fool. You should read it.
[Guest]: It's a very interesting story about this guy who's fooled by everybody in his village,
[Guest]: you know, and everybody just takes him for granted. His neighbors take advantage of him.
[Guest]: He's a baker and his wife is very promiscuous. She also takes advantage of him. So lots of
[Guest]: people take advantage of him. And, you know, the basic thing is that it's better to be
[Guest]: fooled than to fool others, you know, and that's the message of the story. It's a very
[Guest]: nice story. It's worth reading. It's based on some old kind of folktale of Judaism from
[Guest]: those traditions. And I think, so yeah, I think there's a kind of interplay between
[Guest]: trying to find a place in this world. And then we also need to create a social order
[Guest]: or a setting in which virtues are easier to practice in some sense. The right thing is
[Guest]: easier to do. And I think that's very important because if you put all the onus on the individual,
[Guest]: it just becomes a very, very difficult situation. So what is good is something that we discover
[Guest]: over time and in specific situations, but also to be able to do that good and to be
[Guest]: able to behave well and to be fair to each other, to be just. And it's very important
[Guest]: to find a setting in which it's something which doesn't destroy your life or take too
[Guest]: much away from you, you know. And that I think is very important. That's why you should think
[Guest]: in social settings, virtues. So when you think of profession, you think about professional
[Guest]: bodies and professions as such, you know, not about the individual heroic professional
[Guest]: rising up and doing whatever. So when you talk about, for example, you need to, for
[Guest]: example, these days we talk about institutions and judges and all of that. I think it's completely
[Guest]: wrong to put things on individual judges and why didn't you stand up and all. What did
[Guest]: we as a polity do? I mean, why don't we have more balance of power in the polity? Why is
[Guest]: a heroic judge has to stand up to a dominant power structure and say, oh, I will stand
[Guest]: up and show it to you. Why? I mean, we as a polity have created a situation in which
[Guest]: judges have to take very difficult decisions and you say, oh, it's very easy to say, right?
[Guest]: It could destroy everything and stand up to basically for a meaningless quest, because
[Guest]: if the government really, a dominant party really wants something, it's very difficult
[Guest]: for a judge to stand up to it. And you can stand up, but it won't be fructuous because
[Guest]: they'll find other ways to undermine whatever you did that the judge writes in an order.
[Guest]: So these are, I think, cost cutting themes across institutions, professions, families,
[Guest]: all of that, that there's a setting in which it's easier to exercise virtues and be a good
[Guest]: judge or a good teacher or good doctor and all of that. And then the owner still remains
[Guest]: on the individual to figure it out and do it, you know, and then you'll always fail
[Guest]: and you will try to do better. So, I mean, I do have, I mean, situations where I behave
[Guest]: badly and I still, I'm haunted by them. But that haunting, I try to now process towards
[Guest]: doing better in the future, you know. I have misspoken with somebody, fought with somebody,
[Guest]: said something wrong. But it's just a part of human life. If you long, I've now lived
[Guest]: for almost 39 years in this world. So there is a certain sense of past, you know, and
[Guest]: then there are wrongs and rights and all of that. But one thing is for sure that one keeps
[Guest]: getting better is I think what one has to take that the arch should be in that direction
[Guest]: and hopefully one dies as a saint.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned you're almost 39. Listen, my episodes go on for a long time. So by the
[Amit Varma]: time this recording is over, you might actually get there. You mentioned Orwell, who is of
[Amit Varma]: course one of, like two of my intellectual heroes Orwell and Bastia and they both died
[Amit Varma]: at around 50 and they both kind of wrote their greatest works just before they turned 50.
[Amit Varma]: And I have like a year and a half to go till 50. So, but I, yeah, good luck to me. But
[Amit Varma]: that's a great quote about, you know, how, which I hadn't heard before, where you quoted
[Amit Varma]: Orwell as saying that by the time you are 50, you should know your real face or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: Then you mentioned sainthood and Orwell's thoughts on sainthood are also interesting,
[Amit Varma]: where in this great essay he wrote called Reflections on Gandhi, this first para is
[Amit Varma]: just a work of genius. And he wrote, quote, saints should always be judged guilty until
[Amit Varma]: they are proved innocent. But the tests that have to be applied to them are not, of course,
[Amit Varma]: the same in all cases. In Gandhi's case, the questions one feel inclined to ask are to
[Amit Varma]: what extent was Gandhi moved by vanity, by the consciousness of himself as a humble naked
[Amit Varma]: old man sitting on a prayer mat and shaking empires by sheer spiritual power? And to what
[Amit Varma]: extent did he compromise his own principles by entering politics, which of their nature
[Amit Varma]: are inseparable from coercion and fraud? Stop quote. And this leads to a couple of themes,
[Amit Varma]: which you and I have sort of discussed in the past. And one of them is my sense that
[Amit Varma]: sometimes the quest for virtue can be driven by the vanity of wanting to see yourself as
[Amit Varma]: a virtuous person. And this entangling that can be, you know, interesting. Like, for example,
[Amit Varma]: what I see on social media is that those who project the most virtue are often the least
[Amit Varma]: virtuous, right? And we can both think of examples of people like this. And that's therefore
[Amit Varma]: something that makes me question myself. And I think of the right thing to do, like one
[Amit Varma]: test I have for myself on social media these days, I have failed this test in the past,
[Amit Varma]: but these days, is that if I'm putting out a tweet, I need to ask myself that am I doing
[Amit Varma]: it for the validation of other people so that other people think better of me, because that
[Amit Varma]: is a natural motive, but it is a little suspect. Now, the other aspect that it leads me to
[Amit Varma]: think about is the way you presented these phases of life, you almost seem to be saying
[Amit Varma]: that once you reach a certain age, the examined life will lead to the virtuous life that you
[Amit Varma]: need to sit back and introspect and whatever. And thinking about this, I think about your
[Amit Varma]: earlier reference to spending your younger years playing a game, which is a great description
[Amit Varma]: and the term is apt. But I'm just thinking that you can look at it in retrospect and
[Amit Varma]: know you were playing the game. In the moment, 99.9% of people don't know they are playing
[Amit Varma]: the game. Yes, they are in the game. And the thing is that the game is shaping who they
[Amit Varma]: are. So after the game, there is no point in introspecting, they have changed. And the
[Amit Varma]: morality that they had to or the ways of doing things that they had to adapt while playing
[Amit Varma]: the game is something that would have sort of changed them so much. Like I think it was
[Amit Varma]: you who once told me about how politics corrodes character, because the incentives of the political
[Amit Varma]: game are such that you can enter politics with the finest of intentions. But all the
[Amit Varma]: necessary compromises that you make will eventually will shape your actions and your actions will
[Amit Varma]: eventually change who you are. And then you are a different person at the end of the process.
[Amit Varma]: And that's exactly what Orwell talks about in this para as well. And so therefore, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I'll just sort of end this by saying that, therefore, I completely agree with you
[Amit Varma]: on the centrality of thinking about the systems from which these incentives emerge, the incentives
[Amit Varma]: which drive us to do the things that we do, like one thing that I've always said of our
[Amit Varma]: system of government is that we should design our system of government in such a way that
[Amit Varma]: even the worst, most immoral psychopath is in power, there's limited damage he can do,
[Amit Varma]: because the system is one that rewards good behavior and punishes bad behavior. And it
[Amit Varma]: works in that respect. And, you know, so a lot of the responsibility is, therefore, you
[Amit Varma]: know, comes from the system, you want to design the structures in place in our society. And
[Amit Varma]: in, and by design, I don't mean in a top down way, obviously, as you know, but, you know,
[Amit Varma]: we need to think about how to move society in the state in directions where they are
[Amit Varma]: providing incentives for good behavior, rather than just the other way around, as we see.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's a lot to chew and talk about. So I think that two questions that you asked,
[Guest]: one is that, when is virtue, virtue, and one is virtue vanity. And the other question is
[Guest]: that, what is the point of introspection after a point when you already become something
[Guest]: by having played a particular game? So I think both of these questions go back to the nature
[Guest]: of human consciousness. I mean, in some senses, and it's a big term, human consciousness,
[Guest]: and I'll put a simple kind of a beginning frame to it that if you reflect back on yourself,
[Guest]: at least when I reflect back on it, I know that my conscious thinking rational mind is
[Guest]: only the tip of the iceberg. There's a lot of me that I actually don't know, because
[Guest]: that's the past that is suppressed, and it's unconscious. And I feel it in terms of emotions,
[Guest]: and sometimes certain longings rise out of it, and certain things come to my mind, conscious
[Guest]: mind, and I have to pay attention or ignore or whatever, there are complexes hidden. And
[Guest]: psychoanalysts study this and write about it and all of that. And who we are is often
[Guest]: not what the stories that we tell ourselves, right? So, but the stories we tell ourselves
[Guest]: at the readings we do and the conversations we have do have a bearing, you know, it's
[Guest]: not a, and in fact, the fact that we read something or talk to some people about some
[Guest]: things itself reflects the kind of a deeper longing, right? And the fact that we're sitting
[Guest]: here and talking about virtues, maybe partly vanity, and but there's also more to it, perhaps,
[Guest]: because we're talking about this and not something else, which could also serve vanity at the
[Guest]: same time. So there are different paths to vanity, which path to vanity do you take?
[Guest]: But one key point that I've experienced in my own life is that, can you keep a distance
[Guest]: between what you need to do out of necessity, because it's again going back to the human
[Guest]: consciousness and then self nature of the self that you have. So, do you have this kind
[Guest]: of a clear sense that this is a persona that you're wearing, and there is a certain role
[Guest]: that you need to play. And then there is a self that is within it. And that remains a
[Guest]: little less uncontaminated, you know, because it's a duty that, for example, if I was a
[Guest]: prime minister of this country, I would have to do horrible things. I would have to just
[Guest]: the nature of the responsibility is such that you need to sometimes order violence on your
[Guest]: enemies. Sometimes you do order violence on your own citizens, because they are doing
[Guest]: things which are they're trying to break away the republic or something. There are things
[Guest]: difficult decisions to be taken, which will create harsh hardships, but maybe create good
[Guest]: things on the on the whole utilitarian kind of logic is particularly sound, but it creates
[Guest]: some harm. So, if you're sitting in a position like that, and you have to take decisions,
[Guest]: at that point of time, can you simply get your personal morality into it and make it
[Guest]: completely transferred into a position that demands by the virtue of you being sitting
[Guest]: there. I mean, it could be any other human being, the same demands will be made on them.
[Guest]: It's not about you as such. So, and there is a possibility I think that we need to give
[Guest]: that there are people who behave badly, but are quite virtuous, actually, because the
[Guest]: bad behavior was necessary in the context in which they found themselves, because of
[Guest]: the nature of the world that we live in, that there are power struggles and you have duty
[Guest]: to play those power struggles and defend your own, you know, especially in the international
[Guest]: order, right? You're more or less anarchy kind of an order where you're trying to protect
[Guest]: your country and further its interest in a way others are also fighting the same game
[Guest]: and many of them don't see it as a, you know, as a win-win situation. Some of them actually
[Guest]: want to impose a win-lose on you. So, you have to do the things that are necessary.
[Guest]: You have to hide things, you have to lie a little bit, sometimes you have to cheat, you
[Guest]: don't do things that you may not do in personal life. So, I think if you want to, if it's
[Guest]: particularly interesting for anybody to understand someone's character, then you have to watch
[Guest]: and see how they behave in different situations, you know, and then make a view about, well,
[Guest]: is it vanity or is it virtue or is it a bit of both, you know. But I see the point that
[Guest]: Orwell is making that sometimes something like this can also be presented as, and we
[Guest]: see that in some of the scandals that come out about our Babas and all, sometimes, very
[Guest]: rare, it's a very small percentage to be very clear. There are many, many spiritual people
[Guest]: in this country, gurus and all who are not like that. Most are not like that. There are
[Guest]: a small number who come out and give a bad name to everybody else who play that game
[Guest]: that this is a path to glory and vanity and all of that. So, I think there's a distinction
[Guest]: that McIntyre draws, which is very important and it's easy to state it, very difficult
[Guest]: to actually assess it what's going on. So, he says there are two things. Whenever you
[Guest]: are doing something, there are two kinds of goods that you can be pursuing. One is the
[Guest]: goods in external to the practice. So, you're doing podcasting because you want to get money,
[Guest]: fame, all of that. Or there are goods internal to practice. You're doing podcasting because
[Guest]: you love the joy of podcasting and you want to be a better podcaster. This activity itself
[Guest]: makes you feel very, I mean, good and you want to do better at doing that. And it's
[Guest]: just a great podcast, even if it makes no money for you and basically you die in penury.
[Guest]: That's not the case with you. Thankfully, in your case, both are more or less aligned.
[Guest]: But in many cases, there is a conflict between goods internal to practice by trying to be
[Guest]: a good practitioner of something, being a good professional or whatever it may be and
[Guest]: goods external to practice, which is the money and the fame and all that comes with it. So,
[Guest]: virtue is the latter, which is the goods internal to practice. A person who is genuinely virtuous
[Guest]: is the one who is acting well because he actually wants to act well. Because for the sake of
[Guest]: acting well, the right behavior is the right behavior for them. And they do it because
[Guest]: it's the right behavior, not because it will give them something else or something.
[Guest]: A completely different example. Recently, I read an interview with this Harshal Patel.
[Guest]: He said that I am not the kind of person who needs 10 crore rupees in his life. He got
[Guest]: 10 crores in IPL, but it's a signal of the fact that I am a good player, you know, something
[Guest]: to that effect, he said. It was very interesting to me, because he sees that 10 crore rupees
[Guest]: is basically a sign of what he's good at. But he actually plays it because he enjoys
[Guest]: playing cricket. If you go by what he said, and I take it on a space value, why not? So,
[Guest]: he basically enjoys playing cricket and he wants to be better at playing cricket. It's
[Guest]: just incidental that he's getting 10 crore rupees. He would still play cricket maybe
[Guest]: if he's giving him less. So, he said it, I'm not the kind of person who needs 10 crore
[Guest]: rupees a year in his life. But it just shows that I'm good at this, you know. So, that
[Guest]: I think distinction is very important. What is it that you're seeking when you're seeking,
[Guest]: you're working on doing something, whether it's in the personal life or professional
[Guest]: life, political or whatever. So, there are politicians who do all the bad things, looking
[Guest]: from a very simplistic perspective of some principles of good or bad. But in their situation,
[Guest]: bad or the right thing, they may still be very virtuous, actually, as human beings,
[Guest]: their duty is demanded. And even vanity can sometimes, if you're in a particular position,
[Guest]: you have to appear a certain kind of a persona, you know. You can't say that I will not give
[Guest]: public talks, I will not do this and that. Because if you are in public life, you have
[Guest]: to do all of these things. There's a vanity or is that your duty? You know, giving speeches
[Guest]: is your duty, right? It's not just vanity, seeking people's attention and all that.
[Guest]: The other question is a harder one, what you become and what you can become by reflection
[Guest]: and all of that. It's a much harder question, because I mean, I'm at a stage of life when
[Guest]: actually I'm going through that kind of a process, right? Because one is looking back
[Guest]: and saying, okay, I've had this kind of a life and what can I take from there? So, there
[Guest]: is a becoming, which I'm actually not aware of, because it's just kind of unconscious.
[Guest]: I've shaped, I've been shaped in certain ways, the directions that took me in. And now I'm
[Guest]: trying to gradually understand it by trying to imagine myself and trying to, through my
[Guest]: dreams and all whatever, to understand what is it that I suppress and what is it that
[Guest]: I elevated to the level of my, this kind of illusory category that I created with my name
[Guest]: and put a lot of, you know, cool features into it and said, this is what I am, you know,
[Guest]: which is what actually the persona is. And then the rest of it is basically to be discovered
[Guest]: and figured out. And to, as I said, you can try to do better and try to be good without
[Guest]: being too, I mean, you don't have to be very self-conscious about it. No, it's not some
[Guest]: kind of a project where you start, okay, this is a start date, that's the end date, I need
[Guest]: to do all this is a critical path I have to follow to get there. That's all. It's just
[Guest]: a longing and you need to be aware of it and try to do it. It's not something which is
[Guest]: can be fully planned in advance and there will be surprises in life. And sometimes you'll
[Guest]: dream something and it will mean something to you and it will change the way you think
[Guest]: about something. Sometimes you meet somebody who can provide you guidance, you can find
[Guest]: a guru or something. You sometimes you'll have a conversation with a friend which can
[Guest]: certainly strike you, okay, yeah, I didn't realize that about myself. Now I'm trying
[Guest]: to be, I'll try to think more about it and thinking will go some way. I don't think we
[Guest]: can change completely by just thinking about ourselves. But it's one part of the puzzle
[Guest]: and self-reflection has in many people's lives made a difference. Not by yourself only, but
[Guest]: talking to others, reading, thinking, talking, behaving differently, building better habits,
[Guest]: those kind of things. Having some kind of rules of thumb as well sometimes, although
[Guest]: they're often kind of meant to be broken. But I don't think that we are completely formed
[Guest]: by our experiences by the time we are in middle age. At least also, that's not the bet I'm
[Guest]: taking. I think there is room for a new birth, you know, in some senses, a renewal of sorts
[Amit Varma]: in life.
[Amit Varma]: I think in a sense, we are our own projects and the projects are bound to fail because
[Amit Varma]: you are going to die one day. But you know, just to go back to what you said.
[Guest]: That's not failure. I mean, life is essential.
[Amit Varma]: I'm being glib.
[Amit Varma]: That is an essential part of life.
[Amit Varma]: I'm being glib though I won't go so far. But I mean, it's the end of life. It's not a part
[Guest]: of life.
[Guest]: But life would have no meaning without death.
[Amit Varma]: Life has no meaning. But just to just to kind of go back to what you said about how even
[Amit Varma]: someone who does bad things can be virtuous. And I'll say yes and no. And yes, in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that we are responding to incentives within a particular context. And yeah, so I get where
[Amit Varma]: that is coming from. And I sort of get where that is coming from. But equally, I think
[Amit Varma]: that there are places where you have to draw a line. Otherwise, you can do the worst of
[Amit Varma]: things and you can rationalize them and say that, hey, you know, these were the incentives
[Amit Varma]: and this is why I did them. And there's a danger in that because you internalize that
[Amit Varma]: rationalization. And, you know, just when you were thinking of having to do bad things
[Amit Varma]: and you could still be virtuous and like the two men who came to mind are Vajpayee and
[Amit Varma]: Modi. And I think Vajpayee, if he was still alive and still active and still in good shape,
[Amit Varma]: and if he took over in 2014, he would be very different. He was a pretty good prime minister.
[Amit Varma]: And in my view, the diametrically different from Modi, who is a terrible, terrible prime
[Amit Varma]: minister and a terrible, terrible man. And the thing is, they would have done different
[Amit Varma]: things. And you can see this in the sort of not quite the conversation, because they weren't
[Amit Varma]: talking to each other. But that sort of conversation through intermediaries that they had after
[Amit Varma]: the Gujarat 2002 riots, which Vajpayee came out against, and he, I think, used the phrase
[Amit Varma]: Rajdharma. Right. So there was a sense there that there is, you know, a sense of ethics
[Amit Varma]: that remains overarching. And that pervades what you do within sort of the context of
[Amit Varma]: within the context of politics and what's within the context of that particular profession.
[Amit Varma]: And after this, we'll also speak about how virtues relates in a professional context,
[Amit Varma]: which you have thought about deeply and studied and all of that. So I think, so I agree that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the incentives around us shape our behavior and we could, you know, and it is
[Amit Varma]: what it is. But at the same time, I think there is a danger in letting that excuse and
[Amit Varma]: justify everything else that letting that excuse and justify crossing certain lines,
[Amit Varma]: which we should not cross regardless of context.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I mean, one thing is that I didn't know Mr. Vajpayee, I don't know Mr. Modi.
[Guest]: Personally, I'm not going to comment on their personal character.
[Amit Varma]: But you have to judge people by their actions, finally, right?
[Guest]: Yes, but in politics, things are very different from the way you and I, it's a unit of analysis
[Guest]: that which our mind kind of, in a way, to be applied very carefully to be able to make
[Guest]: sense of what's going on. But one thing is for sure, as I said earlier, that virtues
[Guest]: exist in a particular setting. And I mean, sometimes it's easier to be virtuous, sometimes
[Guest]: it's easier to be vicious also. So one of the things that is different, like just a
[Guest]: setting is that Mr. Vajpayee ran a government, which was a coalition government, we never
[Guest]: really, he never really had the kind of power that is required to actually reveal what he
[Guest]: would do when he was a kind of a, he had real power in some senses. Mr. Modi has run is
[Guest]: now the second term of a single party majority, comfortable majority in both times, the second
[Guest]: largest party has been one sixth or one seventh of the largest party in the House of the People
[Guest]: Lok Sabha. It's a, so when you have so much power, it's, there's no, there's no check
[Guest]: on you, right? No real check, especially in a democracy, because power comes from the
[Guest]: people and the people are with you. And so you, you feel that you can do anything and
[Guest]: you can experiment, make big experiments, make, try difficult and painful things, and
[Guest]: hopefully they'll work out and all of that. So one thing that you have to control for
[Guest]: is the kind of power that when you have, especially when you talk about politics, and when you
[Guest]: have power, you will behave very differently, the same person will behave very differently
[Guest]: when you don't have power. So I don't know whether the counterfactual of Mr. Vajpayee
[Guest]: would have done better than Mr. Modi when he had this much, these many MPs. I think
[Guest]: we think about this in a very simplistic way. We underestimate the social setting, right?
[Guest]: What is social setting? If you're a Prime Minister, how important is it to you for you
[Guest]: to actually consult and take others on board? For the median person, there are lots of exceptions,
[Guest]: but in the median person, they just want their ideas to be implemented. You know, who wants
[Guest]: to go and take six months to create consensus and all? You do it because you need to, right?
[Guest]: Because you need to do consensus, you need to create constituencies, because otherwise
[Guest]: you can't get anything in. But once you get that kind of power, the chances of making
[Guest]: a mistake are much greater, even with the best intentions. So you listen to the three
[Guest]: or four people who are close to you, many of them may not feel like giving you negative
[Guest]: feedback. And even if they do, I am the one who has a people's, you know, I am this, I
[Guest]: am that. Imagine the kind of ego inflation you've gone through. Some people have waited
[Guest]: for you twice that. So then a completely different kind of a situation emerges, social setting
[Guest]: in which decisions are being made. And I think, I mean, much more, I mean, it's an old Actonian
[Guest]: kind of wisdom, right? Power corrupts, absolute power corrupts absolutely. And there's a version
[Guest]: of it, power makes mistakes and absolute power makes more mistakes, you know. And that's
[Guest]: what I think that's one part of it that you need to consider before making a judgment
[Guest]: about the person as such, because I don't know, there was certainly a PR image of Mr.
[Guest]: Vajpayee, which was very good. And I also hold that in my mind, I come from UP and there's
[Guest]: a nostalgia about his kind of very, in our belt, he was very popular. I even went for
[Guest]: his rally once and it was amazing. It was a big show, you know, because people just
[Guest]: thronged from all over the place to actually listen to him. He had that kind of a connect.
[Guest]: So people just loved him in my part of the world. There was that, but we don't know what
[Guest]: he was like, right? And more importantly, we would never know what he would have done
[Guest]: with so much power. Because see, one of the main things about politicians, they always
[Guest]: tend to hide who they are. You know, they are always trying to play a particular kind
[Guest]: of game in terms of where projecting a certain kind of image is more important than, I mean,
[Guest]: being just be yourself, you know, like we saw that with President Obama also, you know,
[Guest]: he had a very clear, I mean, he projected a certain kind of persona. We'll never know
[Guest]: what he was like in his personal life or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: He was bombing the shit out of Afghanistan all that time.
[Guest]: And also like doing other things which in some other principles that you may apply will
[Guest]: say are bad things to be done. So it's very, very, all I'm saying is two things. One is
[Guest]: that in politics, you have to control for the power that person has, judging their actions,
[Guest]: because that changes the social setting. The other is, it's very difficult to figure out
[Guest]: what a politician actually is in that they are always, always because they in democracy
[Guest]: always looking for power, right? And how do they get power by being popular? What does
[Guest]: it mean to be popular to actually pander to appeal to what would seem acceptable to people?
[Guest]: So who you are becoming is three layers down, something which you and I will not have access
[Amit Varma]: to.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough. I mean, I agree with you power corrupts, but I think that that is a powerful
[Amit Varma]: explanation and not a justification in any way. So I would still say that if power has
[Guest]: corrupted you...
[Guest]: See, you and I are not in the business of justification, we are in the business of explanation.
[Guest]: Justification requires some kind of a legitimacy and authority to be able to...
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but to finish what I'm saying, what I would say is that what I mean by we can
[Amit Varma]: use it as explanation or justification is that if we say that power has corrupted you,
[Amit Varma]: you are by definition not virtuous because you are corrupted. Perhaps you had the seeds
[Amit Varma]: of virtue within you till life took you in another way. But we have we arrive at sort
[Amit Varma]: of if we speak of someone's virtue by looking at the actions. And I agree that that's nuanced,
[Amit Varma]: that you know, where do you draw the line and say that this is part of the job, any
[Guest]: other PM could have done this.
[Guest]: See, also as in democracy, a citizen is our duty to pass a judgment on our leaders, right
[Amit Varma]: or wrong, right? It is our duty.
[Guest]: See, you're contradicting yourself, be content with what you do.
[Guest]: No, it is our duty, but we have to be also mindful that we often get it wrong and we
[Guest]: shouldn't assume that we are right about it. So when you made a comparison in two persons,
[Guest]: I made this answer. But if you ask me, I have been very critical of the decisions that Mr.
[Guest]: Modi has taken and demonetization was a big mistake that he made. He has made other decisions
[Guest]: which I don't agree with. So I think he could have done much better with the power that
[Guest]: he had, he has had now for eight years, we can have those discussions. But I was making
[Guest]: a limited point about comparing in the because you put a counterfactual in front of me. So
[Guest]: I had to push back and say, are you really sure about that?
[Amit Varma]: No, I agree with your answer, you have pushed back successfully, that you know that the
[Amit Varma]: incentives were different that Modi had much more power and power does corrupt. But at
[Amit Varma]: the same time, I would say that intellectually, Modi is a far more limited person in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that Vajpayee was a man of culture, he had a deeper interior life, he read a lot, he
[Amit Varma]: was into poetry, he was into all of that. And none of that is a guarantee for behaving
[Amit Varma]: well as we have seen in the past. But you also have to account for human agency and
[Amit Varma]: the differences between people and but who knows, perhaps everything is just how we are
[Amit Varma]: shaped by circumstance and everything is rationalization. Let's take a quick commercial break. And on
[Amit Varma]: the other side of the break, we'll continue our discussion.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of you first
[Amit Varma]: heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009 and
[Amit Varma]: became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me. And I feel I
[Amit Varma]: was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced
[Amit Varma]: to think about many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well,
[Amit Varma]: that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now
[Amit Varma]: I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of
[Amit Varma]: the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else. So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land
[Amit Varma]: up in your email inbox. You don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The
[Amit Varma]: India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Suyash Rai. And, you know, being
[Amit Varma]: you know, one of the virtues of a podcast is that once you have embarked upon a particular
[Amit Varma]: narrative line, you kind of continue as far as you need to go. And we were talking about
[Amit Varma]: virtue while before the break. So you've also spoken a lot to me in the past about the role
[Amit Varma]: of virtues in professions, where your point is that in every profession, you know, it's
[Amit Varma]: not just about following incentives, but professionals need to think about what are the ethics of
[Amit Varma]: that profession. And there is sort of a deeper meaning that they have to bring to work in
[Amit Varma]: what they do, you know, almost in contrast, or in addition to playing the game as it were
[Amit Varma]: the phrase you used earlier. So can you can you elaborate a little bit on this? What sparked
[Amit Varma]: your interest on this? What is the kind of work you've done? And what are your thoughts
[Amit Varma]: on the subject?
[Guest]: Yeah, so the interest got sparked by just observing professionals at work. I worked
[Guest]: with lawyers, I've gone to doctors, I have dealt with architects, I have worked with
[Guest]: others who are not professionals, professionals, but work with researchers and civil servants
[Guest]: and politicians and so on. And basically, it was trying to reflect on experience, you
[Guest]: know, what, what, who was a good professional and who was not a good professional and trying
[Guest]: to understand it in a conceptual way, but trying to basically from observation itself.
[Guest]: And I found help in some philosophers and all of that, but primary focus was on actually
[Guest]: trying to understand what, what does it mean to be a virtuous person in a work setting
[Guest]: primarily, that was my kind of thing with work means anything like outside of the home
[Guest]: sphere in some senses. So, and, and not so much in the social friendship, those domains
[Guest]: there of course, virtue is very important for that, but my research or thinking on this
[Guest]: has been primarily about the workspaces.
[Guest]: So what's going on is that we have two grand kind of types of powers that are playing out
[Guest]: in this world. One is the state power, you know, which is legitimized by in, in some
[Guest]: places many countries now legitimized by democratic vote, but still it is a particular kind of
[Guest]: political power, which is there to command, control, use coercion sometimes, or do some
[Guest]: nudges or something to get some behavior out of people. It is a, there are different ways
[Guest]: in which states imagine their role in the society for various reasons, historical reasons,
[Guest]: but there is some degree of a top-down perspective involved, at least at the apex level.
[Guest]: In some countries, there is much more decentralization and local liberties are still intact, there
[Guest]: is local governments and all local, local association life really matters. But in many
[Guest]: countries, the trend is generally towards more centralization and greater kind of trying
[Guest]: to find the same principles that apply at the entire country and trying to impose those
[Guest]: principles in some way or the other.
[Guest]: And they are all done in the name of certain kind of good, nice, cute, cuddly things like
[Guest]: rights, certain objectives, which may be utilitarian in nature, trying to maximize good for more
[Guest]: and more people, maximum good for maximum number of people, happiness for maximum number
[Guest]: of people.
[Guest]: Another force that is playing out in this world is the force of markets, which at least
[Guest]: wherever they work as markets, it is based on voluntary exchange, that you and I enter
[Guest]: into a contract and there is some kind of an understanding of I will pay you something
[Guest]: for a service and we will both be happy at the end of the day. But the markets also work
[Guest]: in a way that is, I mean, there are intermediating structures, there are corporate structures,
[Guest]: there are competition in market, different corporates are trying to compete to be able
[Guest]: to get more of the market and those create certain incentives then in which the professionals
[Guest]: have to operate.
[Guest]: Now if you look at the global trend, earlier what used to happen is that you saw economies
[Guest]: of scale in manufacturing. You have a large manufacturing company economy of scale, services
[Guest]: were not considered to be economies of scale. There is a recent research done in the US
[Guest]: and also now being replicated elsewhere. We show that even services now use more corporatization
[Guest]: and more economies of scale are being seen. For various reasons, for example, there are
[Guest]: some common things that you can provide to all professionals working in a corporate which
[Guest]: reduces the transaction cost for that. Each professional acting on their own. For example,
[Guest]: the famous example is dentists. Dentists are getting more corporatized, that now more and
[Guest]: more dentists are working for larger dentistry practices than they used to earlier. It was
[Guest]: just always one standalone dentist procuring all the products and using their clinic as
[Guest]: a provider service. But corporatization is happening to a great extent, at least in large
[Guest]: part of the economy, professionals operate. So lawyers work in law firms, doctors work
[Guest]: in highly corporatized hospitals, including dentists, architects, all of those.
[Guest]: And similarly, many of them work in state and state has its own concerns for working,
[Guest]: for how they should operate. Now the question comes about, so these processes are playing
[Guest]: out. The state is trying to do certain things and markets are expanding and corporates are
[Guest]: growing. Corporatization is happening, there is economy of scale to be had. What is the
[Guest]: role of professional thinking of the profession by itself? What is the role of a professional's
[Guest]: own understanding of his or her own responsibility towards their clients, towards their professional,
[Guest]: towards their professions? It is a question that I basically started by asking that these
[Guest]: grand processes will play out, but are they just basically to be buffeted by these winds
[Guest]: and basically land up somewhere or not? Or do they have anything to say about it? And
[Guest]: is there anything that they can do to shape these things? Because in some ways, the question
[Guest]: I am asking is upstream some markets or state both. In some ways, it's basically about preferences
[Guest]: itself. What are the preferences of the professional? And then they will participate in these processes
[Guest]: and they will probably make some compromises and do whatever is necessary to continue to
[Guest]: practice their profession. But do they have a sense of what is right, what is the right
[Guest]: thing to do as a professional? So that was the kind of point of departure.
[Guest]: So I have been studying and talking to professionals across lawyers and doctors and structural
[Guest]: engineers and social engineering in India is not a professionalized kind of a practice,
[Guest]: but in other countries it is. Architects, urban planners and all of those and trying
[Guest]: to understand what is the setting in which, how do they decide what a good professional
[Guest]: conduct is? How do they see their ability to practice that conduct in their respective
[Guest]: setting? What can be done to make it easier for professionals to do better?
[Guest]: So I was participating in some conference and conversation where this young person,
[Guest]: this lady spoke about particular profession of doctors where the role is to deliver children.
[Guest]: And the statistics shows that like in the private hospitals, almost half of the children
[Guest]: were delivered through an operation which is a C-section operation and the government
[Guest]: hospital it's a very small percentage, I think like 14-15% or something. It's the same profession
[Guest]: right and they are responding to different situations, acting very differently as professionals.
[Guest]: They go through the same training, they are part of the same association, all of that.
[Guest]: So it was, I was thinking why does this happen? This is the same question I have come across
[Guest]: in many settings. And what does it take for a professional to navigate the landscape in
[Guest]: which they are situated and try to do better? And how can this landscape be changed to make
[Guest]: it easier for them to do better? And there are certainly compulsions, there are constraints,
[Guest]: there are economic constraints, there are constraints on power. Politicians have to
[Guest]: respond to certain kind of incentives themselves to deliver certain things which are, which
[Guest]: have to be delivered with quickly and then there are, that play out, play down through
[Guest]: the system. So, but you see big differences. If you just look at the same profession in
[Guest]: different settings, behave differently.
[Guest]: So then I actually started studying and talking to these people and then, so what I see that
[Guest]: okay there is one role that is played by education. So what do they, what are they taught when
[Guest]: they enter into the college to get a professional degree or whatever it may be? Or even if it
[Guest]: is not a college based thing like a chartered accountancy, but they do get a kind of training
[Guest]: right and an apprenticeship. So in some senses by working with a chartered accountant, all
[Guest]: doctors, lawyers, they do at some point in education get apprentice with either they
[Guest]: do a residency in the hospital doctor or young lawyer, usually starts with basically being
[Guest]: a rookie for another older lawyer and a lot of their learning happens in that early stage.
[Guest]: Then they enter into the professional field in a more, slightly more independent way.
[Guest]: Usually it varies from profession to profession. Sometimes you have to take many years to actually
[Guest]: then strike it on your own. Otherwise it takes some time and I mean it can be quick also
[Guest]: and depending on you as a person also, but then the settings do differ. So and that time
[Guest]: you actually are looking at the market and what's possible and how others are doing and
[Guest]: what are the standards in which you can operate and in that there are actually many challenges
[Guest]: in different professions that the standards are so low and so, so much focus on getting
[Guest]: shortcuts and trying to find the easy least cost path instead of trying to think about
[Guest]: what would be the right thing to do for the client and all that. And also public goods
[Guest]: are missing. So one of the things that happens across professions is that if a young professional
[Guest]: wants to grow as a professional, there's not that much by way of support from the larger
[Guest]: professional bodies. Professional bodies, not all of them, I will not name any of them
[Guest]: because it's kind of, it's impolite, but most of them in India are very self-serving bodies.
[Guest]: They are just there to protect their professionals. They don't hold their professionals to account
[Guest]: when they behave badly. They don't supply enough public goods to young professionals
[Guest]: who are coming up. So for example, in some sectors, some areas there's not enough standard
[Guest]: form contracts, legal advice, different ways in which you can reduce the cost of business
[Guest]: for the professionals so that they can just focus on the professional practice and then
[Guest]: transaction costs are related to virtues in some way or the other in this sense.
[Guest]: So I mean, the method I've used is basically, as I said, observing, reflecting, interviewing
[Guest]: lots of professionals and doing study groups. So sometimes I've done, I'm not going to details
[Guest]: because they're all off the record conversations with taking a group of professionals and running
[Guest]: through them for several weeks about their profession and saying what is it that shapes
[Guest]: behavior in their profession and how do they, how do we ensure in the language that we spoke
[Guest]: earlier that more and more professionals pursue goods internal to practice and that becomes
[Guest]: consistent with goods external to practice, that being a good professional actually pays
[Guest]: off. I'm not expecting professionals to compromise on everything.
[Guest]: So the one thing is the market versus virtue thing that can, how do we ensure that markets
[Guest]: are structured in a manner that virtuous behavior is rewarded more and more. We means, it's
[Guest]: not for me to design, it's more something that evolves and emerges from interactions
[Guest]: between the professionals among themselves and professionals with their corporate kind
[Guest]: of counterparts with whom they work. And the other is on the side of the state, right,
[Guest]: that how do you as a professional work with the state to do the right thing. So there
[Guest]: the themes are very different.
[Guest]: So one thing that I learned from talking to some of the professionals is that in fact
[Guest]: virtue, the way we think about sometimes in an abstract way is an impediment to improving
[Guest]: things in the state because you may have a simplistic notion or not simplistic, you may
[Guest]: have the right notion, perfectly right notion of what good professional ethics are and how
[Guest]: to implement them in this world. But you work with the state and state is a very messy creature.
[Guest]: It's a very, it's actually far more informal than we sometimes understand. There are shortcuts
[Guest]: taken, there are favors to be done, there are compromises to be made, you know, and
[Guest]: many professionals feel very uncomfortable doing any of that because they feel that it
[Guest]: would, it compromises the integrity to work with the state. But one thing that I think
[Guest]: is very important to keep in mind is that when you are moving from one kind of a society
[Guest]: to another kind of a society, it's a journey. You don't make a leap. You don't go to
[Guest]: an open access order or a fully well-organized society where complete rule of law, all of
[Guest]: that in one giant leap. So the way to think about is to make progress. How can we make
[Guest]: the next step? So more and more professionals should engage with the state while keeping
[Guest]: as much of their professional ethic intact and how do you make that easy? How do you
[Guest]: make it easy for professionals to work with the state? Because state is a very important
[Guest]: entity. If professionals don't join the state or work with the state at least, if
[Guest]: they feel very suppressed by the state, then it's a big loss for the country. It's
[Guest]: a big impediment to building genuine state capacity and improving one of the most, probably
[Guest]: the most important organization in this country, which is the state. Many organizations constituted,
[Guest]: but there is a state as such, okay. And there are government, there are judiciary, more
[Guest]: and more professionals should join that and good, excellent professionals should join
[Guest]: that and they should become judges, they should become civil servants, they should behave
[Guest]: like professionals while working, they should join government colleges, medical colleges,
[Guest]: the hospitals, they should be teachers, all of that. So how do you actually work with
[Guest]: the state while actually being a professional who is virtuous and how do you define virtue
[Guest]: in that context? So there again, I think the idea of, you know, what is the right dharma
[Guest]: to follow in a particular context is very important that yes, there are professional
[Guest]: virtues, but the main thing is that virtues are forged in the practice, right? If you're
[Guest]: not in the game, if you're not in that field of practice, if you're not actually making
[Guest]: things, if you're an architect, or if you're not actually serving people as a doctor, if
[Guest]: you're just in an abstract way in some field, actually, there are NGOs or the academic types
[Guest]: who just write critiques about their say, they're not in the game, but they are writing
[Guest]: critiques of the game, so to speak, because they think their abstract notions are far
[Guest]: superior to the actual practice of that thing, which is always messy, which is easy to critique.
[Guest]: Critique is always been very easy, right? It's like, it is the easiest thing to do in
[Guest]: a, especially in a relatively disorganized society like ours, and which is also struggling
[Guest]: to grow. So how do you actually make that easier, but also more realistic that how do
[Guest]: you socialize professionals about the realities of the Indian state? And that what will it
[Guest]: take to work with the state? And what, how do you socialize them into starting working
[Guest]: with the state and doing more with the state? And I have some friends in different professions
[Guest]: who have been guiding me, helping me a little bit. I've never written about this at all.
[Guest]: It's just all, as I said, most change happens one individual at a time. So I work with some
[Guest]: professionals and individuals and trying to think better about these issues and get something
[Guest]: started, some, some practices started, some kind of a course is started, which can be
[Guest]: which can reflect on these issues, some thinking started on, on these issues. But I see both
[Guest]: these, whether the state's functioning and virtues, how they interact, you know, the,
[Guest]: the political and governance imperatives and how they can have a very suppressing world
[Guest]: and bearing on the professionals without actually rewarding the professionals. Markets can reward
[Guest]: you, but they can also suppress your virtues in certain contexts, especially under certain
[Guest]: kind of a corporate setting. And because, and so there is an interplay here. So and
[Guest]: then there's a tripartite thing, there's professional virtues, there's state and then there's market
[Guest]: because markets and state also interact. And many times the problem in the market is because
[Guest]: state has shooed some regulation, which actually makes it very difficult to run a good business.
[Guest]: So those are the interplay that I'm interested in. I'm just taking a few professions and
[Guest]: studying them. It's been just three years since I started it. So it's not too much work.
[Guest]: I think this is a 20 year kind of a, I'll understand it maybe in 20 years to have something
[Guest]: useful to say. But yeah, in the interim, there'll be some things that I'll hopefully write and
[Guest]: publish. And maybe some things will come out in terms of actual change in behavior and
[Guest]: all of that. Some new practices will come out. But that's my aspiration that something
[Guest]: will happen on that. And ultimately, I need co-conspirators, I need virtuous senior doctors
[Guest]: and lawyers and architects and structural engineers and chartered accountants and company
[Guest]: secretaries and all those to engage and think about these issues so that we can do better.
[Guest]: Because professions are sites of virtue. And they are in a way the most important, among
[Guest]: the most important associations that we have, where not just professional but also democratic
[Guest]: virtues can thrive. And they are participatory, they are member bodies. In theory, everybody
[Guest]: is equal because they are all qualified professionals. And you can learn a lot by participating in
[Guest]: these bodies and helping each other do better. There's a lot of collective common good that
[Guest]: they can provide to each other. They can reduce transaction costs for specific members, they
[Guest]: can help them be more virtuous on the market side. They can also try to find ways to work
[Guest]: with the state and do better in terms of professional input into working with the state bodies.
[Guest]: If you look at the public infrastructure in India, so much of it is going without proper
[Guest]: architectural input. It's just ugly buildings, badly designed public spaces, so much, so
[Guest]: much of it. The cities look so unloved, you know. So I feel that there's a lot to be gained
[Guest]: by engaging with those professionals. Similarly, whether it's hospitals or schools or build
[Guest]: bridges and everywhere, professional input is very important. And you need the best of
[Guest]: the professionals to work with the state.
[Amit Varma]: So a larger question going a bit deeper into this, but first let me recontextualize, try
[Amit Varma]: to recontextualize what you said in a context that I understand and that I've sort of spoken
[Amit Varma]: with past guests about, which is the context of journalism. Now, one question that I've
[Amit Varma]: often come at journalists on the show with is that, how do you look at journalism in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that on the one hand, there is an instrumental purpose to journalism, that people
[Amit Varma]: want information, people want news, you're providing it to them, it is supply and demand.
[Amit Varma]: Therefore, the bottom line matters, you are after all running an enterprise, you have
[Amit Varma]: people to employ, mouths to feed, you know, you need to look at ROI for what you do. So
[Amit Varma]: all those standard business imperatives come into play. And on the other hand, there is
[Amit Varma]: also a higher notion of journalism, which without quite being able to justify why those
[Amit Varma]: higher notions exist, I believe they do, at least that's what I have adopted as, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the way I think about the profession and what I might extend into other things that I do,
[Amit Varma]: which is that, you know, there is a value to speaking truth to power, there is a value
[Amit Varma]: in trying to write that first draft to history with as much fidelity to the truth as possible,
[Amit Varma]: nebulous as the truth is. And so you get it. And in modern times, there are, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there appears to be a conflict. And this is where the state and the market comes in. Now,
[Amit Varma]: in an ideal world, the state would protect your rights, and you would just do what you
[Amit Varma]: have to do, and there would be free speech, so no interference. In an ideal world, the
[Amit Varma]: market would, you know, reward good behaviour on your part, because you know, you benefit
[Amit Varma]: in the markets by, you make money in a free market, basically by making someone else better
[Amit Varma]: off, it is a positive sum game, you provide something that makes them better off, they
[Amit Varma]: pay you for it, both of you are better off, that's the whole nature of the beast. However,
[Amit Varma]: what we see in India is issues on both these fronts, in the sense that the state is the
[Amit Varma]: oppressive predatory state, which I go on about all the time, and it is anything but
[Amit Varma]: a free environment. And our constitution also does not protect free speech as much as it
[Amit Varma]: should. So that is one problem at the level of the state. And the state can also use this
[Amit Varma]: power to clamp down on critics in the sense that, hey, I might own a big newspaper, but
[Amit Varma]: I'm a business family, I might also have a chemical factory, what am I going to do? So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the incentives are messy, everybody who's of a certain size has so much to lose,
[Amit Varma]: that the incentives are to toe the line. And as far as the market is concerned, one, we
[Amit Varma]: don't really have a free market free market. But even if we did, you know, the issue that
[Amit Varma]: would come up there is that, what if people, you know, I might have the highest of values
[Amit Varma]: ki aisa hona chahiye, but what if the world today is full of narrative battles, and people
[Amit Varma]: want to engage in those battles, and the the demand from the market is to provide those
[Amit Varma]: narratives, which they already believe in, or which give them comfort or whatever, and
[Amit Varma]: not necessarily for a bipartisan pursuit of the truth, then do you play to those forces
[Amit Varma]: as well. And I would actually not be so negative about it in the sense that I think that one
[Amit Varma]: of the beautiful things about the market is that it's not just majority wins. And like
[Amit Varma]: in politics, everybody can express themselves, you know, in that sense, my podcast is not
[Amit Varma]: a mainstream thing. But it reaches a lot of people who crave depth, who otherwise a market
[Amit Varma]: does not, you know, otherwise, the mainstream players don't cater to because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: they want numbers and they are going, you know, a mile wide and an inch deep. And there
[Amit Varma]: are people who want a lot more depth. So the market has created spaces for all kinds of
[Amit Varma]: different voices, put the tools of production in our hands, all that is fine. But the but
[Amit Varma]: the question that this leads me to is that notion of journalism, as high having some
[Amit Varma]: higher values, where does it come from? Like when you're talking about virtues within professions,
[Amit Varma]: what you are in a sense implying, when you say that it is upstream of the state and upstream
[Amit Varma]: of society is you are implying that this is not just something instrumental, right? It
[Amit Varma]: is not there is each profession has a set of ethics, or maybe that's a question, does
[Amit Varma]: it have a sense of ethics that exists independent of all these forces, you know, and and to
[Amit Varma]: turn our attention on medicine, for example, doctors are taught the Hippocratic Oath, for
[Amit Varma]: example, you know, thou shall do no harm and all of that. And it would appear that there
[Amit Varma]: is a code of ethics there. But as we have seen, you also have to look at the incentives
[Amit Varma]: of doctors. And, you know, you could be a doctor who loves to spend 20 minutes with
[Amit Varma]: each patient, but your incentives are that apply fast and furious heuristics, tell them
[Amit Varma]: thus test karo for each of which you're getting a commission. And that's how the business
[Amit Varma]: runs. And you can even rationalize it at a utilitarian level, saying that I'm serving
[Guest]: many more people and giving less service to many more people.
[Guest]: That is the main thing about it that it's not good versus evil, right? It's a truly
[Guest]: tragic situation where different goods have to be balanced against each other.
[Amit Varma]: So two questions that arise from this and the first of them deals with this directly
[Amit Varma]: is that have you seen a philosophical justification for these kind of virtues in any profession
[Amit Varma]: existing independent of the instrumental reason for that profession coming into being an existing
[Amit Varma]: independent of the state in the markets?
[Guest]: No, and actually it shouldn't because you are here to serve, right? Like a doctor is
[Guest]: not someone who is sitting on the top of a mountain and basically being a doctor without
[Guest]: actually dealing with a patient. And as soon as you deal with a patient, you are actually
[Amit Varma]: in a social setting.
[Amit Varma]: The independent ethic could be to serve, but then how do you define that? And where does
[Amit Varma]: it arise from?
[Guest]: But when you start serving, then you start dealing with constraints, demands, expectations,
[Guest]: market forces, state regulation, state's own constraints, political governance constraints.
[Guest]: And then in that you end up shaping your behavior according to, I mean, what you think is the
[Guest]: right thing and then what are the, what is the kind of situation that you find yourself
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: So let's talk about journalism. It's not, I don't know whether it can be called a profession,
[Guest]: I mean, in a philosophical sense, but many journalists think that they are professionals
[Guest]: and they think about what they do in terms of a profession. But so let's talk about it
[Guest]: in terms of maybe something akin to a profession where there are certain structured practices
[Guest]: which are there and finding truth out and reporting it is very important.
[Guest]: And that's the core of the, I mean, speaking truth to power and all our secondary things,
[Guest]: those are vanities, you know, truth is what really matters. And finding important truths,
[Guest]: which are, I think, consequential and having some degree of direction of attention to things
[Guest]: that really matter is another kind of aspect of a journalistic ethic.
[Guest]: Having some degree of rigor and some, what you call triangulation of whatever you're
[Guest]: trying to say is important. Then also stating it in a manner which is non-sensational. It
[Guest]: should be clear, it should be precise, it should be saying what you know and accepting
[Guest]: what you don't know. So as a citizen, I have expectations from citizens as well. I have
[Guest]: expectations from journalists as well that there are some things that I expect from a
[Guest]: good doctor, some things I expect from a good architect, some things I may expect from a
[Guest]: good lawyer. I expect certain things from journalists as well.
[Guest]: Now journalists say that they have a freedom of speech. That's what they want to get. And
[Guest]: now what is the, so structurally what happens is that whenever you have any right, it each
[Guest]: right creates some elites. Because people who are good at exercising those rights will
[Guest]: become elites through those rights. And society confers those rights. I mean you may use the
[Guest]: language of natural rights and whatever God given, but ultimately society has decided,
[Guest]: it's a decision that it's taken that those rights have to be conferred on the people.
[Guest]: And then each right creates some kind of elite. So when you have a right to property, you
[Guest]: have property, people who either by their sheer ability to run better businesses or
[Guest]: by their rent seeking behavior are able to get, become rich and they become the property
[Guest]: elites.
[Guest]: Similarly, when you freedom of speech, some people are better intellectuals claim, so
[Guest]: they are better at becoming, at use of speech and they want to influence society. I mean
[Guest]: perhaps the most important of those are constitutional judges and lawyers, lawyers who say that their
[Guest]: speech is so powerful that they should transform society in some sense. It's just their views
[Guest]: right and they think they have the philosophical confidence to say that they should transform
[Guest]: the society. It takes quite a bit of vanity to say something like that, but they do.
[Guest]: Journalists are also in that category. They are the elites of the speech right that society
[Guest]: has confirmed on everybody in some sense, but some are elites in those rights. See most
[Guest]: of us never, most of us will never use most of the rights in a manner that society would
[Guest]: want to regulate it, most of us, most of the time. Most of us will sometime use it and
[Guest]: only some of us use it all the time. Journalists are those who use right to speech, push the
[Guest]: boundaries all the time because they are in the business of finding things out that are
[Guest]: not commonly known and reporting those and so on.
[Guest]: Now why does society confer these rights? Because it thinks it works for them. Everything
[Guest]: is an instrumentality in that sense. When you think out from a society's point of view
[Guest]: and why it is conferred those rights, it thinks that it will work for them. So how does a
[Guest]: property elite which is a big business person or someone say that hey I deserve to be elite.
[Guest]: So democracies do not like elites right. Everybody is equal and so on. Why they justify is by
[Guest]: saying that my being rich has helped the society because voluntary exchange in invisible hand
[Guest]: everybody has been better off and I have been a little better because I have done better
[Guest]: for you.
[Guest]: Same thing intellectuals, journalists, everybody also claims that I deserve this disproportionate
[Guest]: uses of this right because my speech is helping society do better. Intellectuals say that,
[Guest]: journalists say that. Similarly, other rights you can go to the list. Each right creates
[Guest]: some kind of elite who are just good, better or more inclined towards using those rights
[Guest]: in a disproportionate, I mean intensive way.
[Guest]: Now the tensions come right because you have some right and you are the one small sliver
[Guest]: of society which uses this rights a lot to speak the truths and so called the truths
[Guest]: and you say that you should be listened to and you should continue to have that right.
[Guest]: You say something about a business person. That business person says this is not true.
[Guest]: Now there are two possibilities. Maybe it is true, maybe it is not true. Maybe it is
[Guest]: true but you have misstated it. Maybe it is not true and but you are not accepting that
[Guest]: it is not true and the business person has again a right to fight back against you. I
[Guest]: mean through legal means or whatever it may be. Defamation and all is there for that.
[Guest]: You say something about some politician, okay, which may or may not be true and even if it
[Guest]: is true, the politician does not like it because hey, I mean it basically weakens him in some
[Guest]: senses because it is maybe something negative. That is why it is being reported and it was
[Guest]: not anyway in the public domain earlier.
[Guest]: So at that point all the tensions come and then it is basically a question about this
[Guest]: profession or this set of people who are exercising these rights versus the people who are trying
[Guest]: to fight them out, whether it is the property elite or the political elites or the powerful
[Guest]: and the basically or the administrative elite, the civil servants and all of those who are
[Guest]: holding the powers so to speak and the journalists pushing back. When that situation comes and
[Guest]: that is an unavoidable situation. All societies have to deal with it. Even the most developed
[Guest]: society even today, you have a president who said the media are the enemy of the people
[Guest]: because he felt aggrieved by the media, so rightly or wrongly but he felt and he is fighting
[Guest]: the media on a daily basis. He suspended some reporter from coming to his press conferences
[Guest]: temporarily and then it got reversed in the court or something.
[Guest]: So there is a constant struggle. The basic point I am trying to make is that if you,
[Guest]: the first duty of a professional and professionals as a collective in a particular domain is
[Guest]: to try to do reasonably well as far as their own professional ethic is concerned. In terms
[Guest]: of within the situation, I am not saying that there is infinite resources and you can do
[Guest]: whatever, but you do whatever. I just, I mean drop on my head, set four of equality, I as
[Guest]: a citizen think that as a journalist should at least aspire towards and then what happens
[Guest]: when a conflict happens is that people should be with you.
[Guest]: So we should never have an illusion that in democracy there are many sources of, the main
[Guest]: source of power is the people, are the people. Whether it is a person who is rich or powerful
[Guest]: in state or journalist getting legitimacy, it has to be earned and it has to be and some
[Guest]: degree of faith in the democracy and the people is required that if I am doing the right thing,
[Guest]: maybe sometimes there will be unfair outcomes and I will be very badly hurt. But to at least
[Guest]: begin with the assumption that if I am doing the right thing, in some way or the other,
[Guest]: people will say and stand with me and say, hey, you are wrongly implicating this person.
[Guest]: But for that, it is very important to have collective unit in action within the profession.
[Guest]: One professional can be destroyed very easily and for the, by the other elites, because
[Guest]: they have been hurt by it and I am just talking about for journalists right now, but it is
[Guest]: true of others as well. Because hey, I mean, nobody will pay attention also. What is an
[Guest]: individual? It is just a, I mean, very easy to forget also. That is the tragedy of human
[Guest]: behavior. In our minds, we are everything, but in the larger scheme of things, we do
[Guest]: not mean that much. But when a collective, there is professional
[Guest]: unity is there and for good reasons, not in the, I mean, self-serving way in which many
[Guest]: professional bodies in India work. So, we have to be realistic about how professional
[Guest]: bodies work and when do they actually stand up to bad behavior by their members, when
[Guest]: do they stand up to defend good behavior by their members, which is under attack from
[Guest]: others. So, the basic point I am making is that yes, these are situations that arise
[Guest]: and there are structural good reasons why they arise. Conflict is good in society. When
[Guest]: it is not a good versus evil thing, journalists get a lot of things wrong.
[Guest]: I remember how some IAS officers who took decision in good faith, but got badly, I mean,
[Guest]: implicated in cases later were completely demonized by some of our journalists a few
[Guest]: years ago under the corruption, I mean, the moment of cacophony around corruption that
[Guest]: happened in India. And I think many of them went overboard. I mean, whether they should
[Guest]: have a right to say that or not, it is a different question. It is a legal question one can answer.
[Guest]: But as a moral question, you know, did you actually exercise the thing before supporting
[Guest]: somebody's criminalization, putting someone in jail? Literally, there are senior journalists
[Guest]: who wrote that they should be in jail for not standing up to their political leaders.
[Guest]: Is that a standard for which someone should go to jail? I mean, that is the kind of language
[Guest]: that was used against some IAS officers who are in jail right now for basically not having
[Guest]: taken any money, but they did not stand up to some wrong decision by senior politicians
[Guest]: who themselves are not in jail, by the way. So, there are many examples of this type.
[Guest]: And all I am saying is that when the conflicts happen, the most important thing is to appeal
[Guest]: to the public, you know, in some ways and as a collective stand up for what is good
[Guest]: and punish what is bad. So, I do not know. I am not an expert on journalism in India.
[Guest]: One has to think and these are very hard questions. And they require practical judgment, a lot
[Guest]: of detailed situational awareness of what is the state of journalism in India, what
[Guest]: are the conditions in this practice. But my big picture is that the question that we should
[Guest]: ask is, are journalists as a community behaving in a way that a good professional should behave?
[Guest]: Are they punishing the bad or are they censoring their own bad behavior of the journalists
[Guest]: at a corporate level, at the level of the professional bodies and all? Are they standing
[Guest]: up for the good behavior of the journalists? And then the conflicts will happen. Everybody
[Guest]: has a legitimate right to fight the other person. This abstract invocation of rights
[Guest]: as something magical, as if it is some kind of fetishized power, which will just suddenly
[Guest]: have an impact on you while we have abandoned it, is meaningless. It has to be, each right
[Guest]: has to be sustained through political, I mean, activity, you know, and ultimately it comes
[Guest]: on to the people. And whether it is journalists or any other professional, it has to earn
[Guest]: that kind of a legitimacy and hopefully people will have a good sense to side with them and
[Guest]: support more virtuous journalism than less. And they will also get things wrong sometimes.
[Guest]: I mean, all of us get things wrong, sometimes injustices happen, but that is the structural
[Guest]: reality in which this thing has to play out.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I think number of points. I mean, firstly, just as an aside, as far as sort of the question
[Amit Varma]: is concerned of rights producing elites that, you know, you have the right to free speech
[Amit Varma]: and then, you know, some people use it more than others and equally the right to property,
[Amit Varma]: some people benefit more than others. But I think they act as incentives for everybody.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the right to property is important as an incentive for everyone to work hard
[Amit Varma]: because they can accumulate wealth and they can keep it and that's how you rise in life.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a positive sum game, it's not a zero sum game. So that's an essential right, which
[Amit Varma]: actually is no longer a fundamental right. Episode 26 of my show with Shruti Rajgopalan
[Amit Varma]: deals on that. And also, the right to free speech is essential to democracy. It might
[Amit Varma]: be the case that, you know, some people exercise it more in an overt way, but that's neither
[Guest]: here nor there, you know, you kind of...
[Guest]: So I'm not disagreeing, I'm just stating a particular way in which I see reality. Ultimately,
[Guest]: you and I can discuss this and agree with it. But society as a whole has to confer it.
[Guest]: And even if you claim, no, no, it's my natural right, God given right, God is not going to
[Amit Varma]: come to give it the right. It's politically constructed and sustained.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not disputing that. But I'm saying that it is something that has to be fought for.
[Amit Varma]: And even if you look at the US, for example, for all their flaws, they do have the right
[Amit Varma]: to free speech in as close to a pure form as you can get. And it's worked for them.
[Guest]: And
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it was politically constructed and they have a historical reason why they have
[Guest]: it. We have a right to privacy, which was sustained over four or five hearings. And
[Guest]: we I mean, we all celebrated it. But do we really have a right to privacy? Tell me.
[Amit Varma]: We'll come to that later. But just to finish my thought that, you know, when you speak
[Amit Varma]: about as a society, we expect truth from journalists. And my thing is, I think there is a danger
[Amit Varma]: in talking from the point of view of abstract groups like society, like what is society
[Amit Varma]: even I think some people might want their journalists to be able to pursue the truth.
[Guest]: Some people want their journalists to pursue, let me finish.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I only said as a citizen, I, that's how I framed it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah. But, you know, you you've sort of used that group phrase, you know, what
[Amit Varma]: society expects, and we should fight for that and all of that. And my sense is that my my
[Amit Varma]: lament at the start was that I might expect you and I might expect one thing from journalists,
[Amit Varma]: but, you know, others want sensational news, others want whatever. And that is sort of
[Amit Varma]: a contestation that is happening. But the deeper question was about is there a philosophical
[Amit Varma]: way to arrive at the notion that there is a particular sense of ethics that pre exists
[Amit Varma]: the pressures of society and the pressures of state and land. And like you said, in my
[Amit Varma]: mind, I don't think there are, but I think we have to construct for ourselves as individuals.
[Guest]: Yeah, as I said, it's something that is constructed in the practice and experience of practice
[Guest]: of doing something. And it's the, I find it very harmful, as I said, people who just stay
[Guest]: away from a practice, but throw stones at that practice and say that, hey, this should
[Guest]: be the way they should be in the game, at least to know what the constraints are and
[Guest]: try to understand. I mean, that's why I was not passing a judgment on the way journalists
[Guest]: in India work. I don't know exactly what's going on there. I'm just putting a frame to
[Guest]: it. And when I say a society, I'm just, I mean, obviously, it's a collection of individuals,
[Guest]: and they may have different views and expectations. And if their expectations are to have more
[Guest]: of yellow journalism and all of that, then there will be consequences for them and their
[Guest]: society itself. But ultimately, we are a self governing society. And we are, as individuals
[Guest]: and as a collective, jointly and severally, and individually responsible for our future.
[Guest]: And that's where there's no shortcut to it. You can't just go to a court and get an injection
[Guest]: and expect that now you have that right. That kind of thinking, I think, is very anti democratic
[Guest]: in many ways. And that's what we are seeing that we think there's some shortcut that there's
[Guest]: some kind of a magical right you can get without convincing a large number of people of this
[Guest]: this kind of right is instrumentally good for society.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, the messy business of politics is something that we have to keep engaging
[Amit Varma]: with not in the narrow sense of electoral politics. But I think even what you and I
[Amit Varma]: are doing by just adding this conversation to the discourse is a form of politics.
[Guest]: We are all in this game. And in fact, much more than public conversation, private conversations
[Guest]: are very, I mean, that's where most of the actual meaningful discussions happen. Because
[Guest]: to be to be able to convince someone, you need to first earn their trust. And that usually
[Guest]: happens with friends and family and colleagues and all.
[Amit Varma]: All right. So after floating around in the air of abstract ideas for a while, though,
[Amit Varma]: with reference to the concrete world, let's kind of get back to your personal story. And
[Amit Varma]: I know you don't like to talk too much about the personal stuff, because you underplay
[Amit Varma]: yourself a bit too much. But I'm really curious to know about your early life in the sense
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, what were your early sort of influences like, like, what were you reading
[Amit Varma]: when you were a kid? Which language were you reading in? Who are the writers you liked
[Amit Varma]: and who influenced you? I want to get a sense of how you were formed in a sense.
[Guest]: I guess the most important thing that comes to mind is that I always escaped to books.
[Guest]: So, I mean, I was introverted, I still feel that I'm quite generally shy of interaction.
[Guest]: I used to go out to play with kids every day. That's that was a routine. It was just something
[Guest]: that was fun also. But whenever I would get time, I was reading something, you know. So,
[Guest]: the first time I came across like a library was, I think, when I was in sixth standard
[Guest]: or something. I went with a friend into this, we were living in Gorakhpur and there was
[Guest]: an office, government office. And we entered and then there was a library inside that office.
[Guest]: It's an office of basically where engineers in government railway used to work. And you
[Guest]: go inside and there's a library. And there I found all the children's classics, you know.
[Guest]: So, till that time, I only had access to mostly, I mean, Hindi literature books, but like children's
[Guest]: literature. So, at that time, someone like Premchand, you can read as a kid or as a grown
[Guest]: up, you know, that's the greatness of Premchand. And I was reading Hindi stories and poems
[Guest]: and all and whatever was available at home, I would read. But that having the access to
[Guest]: the first library, completely open, so many books can be found at the same place. It was
[Guest]: a complete sense of wonder because the idea of library wasn't really so much there in
[Guest]: my mind. And then I started picking up and one by one, I remember I read Adventures of
[Guest]: Robin Hood, I read Ivanhoe, I read Swiss Family Robinson, Treasure Island, which later also
[Guest]: I got my school to read Treasure Island as part of my coursework in school. So, and it
[Guest]: kind of most of my reading when I was in school was basically fiction, more or less. I hardly
[Guest]: read anything else. And I used to love reading novels as I grew older, I started enjoying
[Guest]: in my teens, serious, I mean, literature a little bit, and cultivated some taste for
[Guest]: it automatically. I mean, just snowballing right from one to another, start spending
[Guest]: a little bit time in bookshops and libraries and pick up. And I actually, the first time
[Guest]: I actually started reading serious nonfiction was in college only like when I started picking
[Guest]: up books from different disciplines and reading them. I also got a little bit more money in
[Guest]: my hand. I was doing internships and making some money and spending all of that on books.
[Guest]: I remember doing an internship where I got 8000 rupees. I went to this bookshop in Baroda,
[Guest]: Baroda Book Center, where the owner actually knew the books very well. I said, I've got
[Guest]: this full money, all of it is to be spent on books, you tell me which ones would be
[Guest]: good. He gave me a nice set that all discounted, like new books on decent discount, because
[Guest]: he saw that a student should be given a discount. And he gave me really good books.
[Guest]: 8000 bucks you spent on books.
[Guest]: Yes. And that was many, many years ago. So, this was I think about 20 years ago. So, all
[Guest]: of the money was spent on books he gave me. And he was very gentle and kind enough. It
[Guest]: took a couple of hours and then he gave me suggestions, which all I accepted. I was in
[Guest]: no position to. So, it was eclectic, like the book collection was pretty and but it
[Guest]: basically tripled my book collection one day, because I put all my money into the books.
[Guest]: Then I so basically, I now read very little literature. I mean, I still read a few books
[Guest]: every year of literature, but mostly I read, I mean, nonfiction, but at that time, it was
[Guest]: still substantially reading literature. I really enjoyed that kind of experience of
[Guest]: literature, you know, I mean, literary critics have a lot of words for it, but I actually
[Guest]: felt it opened up the whole world for me in some senses, you know, and as a person who
[Guest]: didn't really enjoy too much social interaction and going out and spending too much time in
[Guest]: large gatherings and all, it was like I'm sitting in a room and reading a book and this
[Guest]: is my kind of, you know, I'm participating in something. Initially, it was so I the first
[Guest]: great book I read was 100 years of solitude. I think I was 19 or something when I read
[Guest]: it and it just amazing level of, I mean, it was just magical, you know, literally, I mean,
[Guest]: I think the genre itself is called magical realism. But what you can achieve in a book,
[Guest]: you know, in terms of the quality of writing the story, the unfettered imagination, put
[Guest]: everything even something as, you know, bad as I mean, insist and all looks magical in
[Guest]: that book. It's a stunning achievement. So I started reading a lot of that genre. And
[Guest]: one key point came when I read my first Saul Bellow, who continues to be my favorite writer
[Guest]: and his first book I read was this at a very strange time in my life in my early 20s. I
[Guest]: was going through some difficult time when this book really spoke to me directly, which
[Guest]: was this basically a thin volume that he read. It was his second book, I think. The dangling
[Guest]: man I think, yeah, the dangling man it's called. And I was like, wow, I mean, literature can
[Guest]: be written in this way also, because it is completely different from the magical realism
[Guest]: and all that I was reading until then and before that children's classic and all of
[Guest]: that. And it, so I went into this whole, which then I actually branched out to other writers
[Guest]: of that genre. I was still reading a lot of magical realism, Salman Rushdie, who I mean,
[Guest]: recently has been in a lot of trouble, great writer. And then I mean, basically branched
[Guest]: out into different types of literature. So, you know, Philip Roth, I like Isaac Singer,
[Guest]: Malamud, all of those. And I mean, it was just a part of my, so in a day one or two
[Guest]: hours you spend reading a nice novel and it's just a very nice part of the day, generally.
[Guest]: And it's whatever may have happened in the day, that's the couple of hours nobody can
[Guest]: take away from you. And then I started actually reading more of non-fictions books and I didn't
[Guest]: have any sense of, so I was, my education was in computer science and I did my MBA later.
[Guest]: So I didn't have any, I mean, I was studying other things and formally, but because I had
[Guest]: this kind of a routine of reading regularly, but it was more like chance, you know, what
[Guest]: I read. If you think back, there was no community of readers with me. There were some elders,
[Guest]: my father's friends who helped me pick a few books here and there, who were kind enough,
[Guest]: who had gone through experiences in their life, who had seen some bit of the world.
[Guest]: So they gave me some hints about what to read and all, but still it was mostly chance what
[Guest]: I read. Like for example, my first philosophy book I read was actually Aristotle. I literally,
[Guest]: and Plato. So I actually read the dialogues directly. I didn't know that there were commentaries
[Guest]: to be read before all of that. I straight away went to the source and started reading
[Guest]: Plato. I remember specifically Plato's Gorgias was my first serious philosophy book. It's
[Guest]: a short dialogue, but a very, I mean, it raises permanent questions. So, and I kind of snowballed
[Guest]: from there and went, first I read the ancient, I had no clue about the modern, but then immediately
[Guest]: soon I got into some of this modern existential philosophy and all of that and started reading
[Guest]: that. Our home always had Mahabharata, Ramayana and all those. So those I read when I was
[Guest]: young. We also used to have these Amar Chitra Kathas, you know, which is, and one of my
[Guest]: neighbors had these bound volumes, which each volume had five of these comics. And you just
[Guest]: go through them and it's amazing, each one of the standalone story. And so I was seeped
[Guest]: in that throughout. But this literature, which is modern and also the, I mean, nonfiction
[Guest]: writing and philosophy, I read a little bit of psychology, I read a little bit of sociology,
[Guest]: I read a little bit of economics at that time. It was just, I mean, why was I doing it? I
[Guest]: couldn't really put a, more like a routine, you know, that almost like that character
[Guest]: of our autodidact from nausea, who just goes from one, but a little better than that, because
[Guest]: you're trying to understand some things and you are actually, you have some reasons for
[Guest]: understanding them. But still, there was a kind of a routine. And then because you read,
[Guest]: you have more questions, right? And you want to read more. And you want to think more about
[Guest]: those questions. And then you branch out. It was just, I mean, kind of a serendipity
[Guest]: that I ended up chancing about some of these great books. And then I developed a taste
[Guest]: for great books. And what I have a category of great books, I have never defined it formally,
[Guest]: but I know what a great book is when I see one. So we spent a few months ago, right?
[Guest]: Looking at 6000 books in a day, you and I. And when I look at a book, I have a sense
[Guest]: of where it belongs, or how much to read and how much importance to give to it. And that
[Guest]: cultivation of that habit in the early 20s, I think was a very important, I mean, point
[Guest]: in my life. And it's been a part of my life. I've really just because we come very late
[Guest]: in the history, there's so much has happened before us. I have to give dues to those who
[Guest]: have come before us. And there's really, I mean, the questions that we are wrestling
[Guest]: with, others have also wrestled with. And I think reading really helps in many ways
[Guest]: to, you will not get answers by reading, but you will certainly get better at asking the
[Guest]: right questions. And that's what I think, especially if you read like fundamental works
[Guest]: on philosophy, psychoanalysis, social systems, sociology, even some of the great works of
[Guest]: anthropology. So you get politics, of course, political theory. So, and it's a law, it's
[Guest]: a vast word out there, right. And more recently, like just a few years ago, or five, six years
[Guest]: ago, I got back to our own kind of reading our own scriptures and trying to see, trying
[Guest]: to put them in conversation with other traditions and saying, what do we have? Our main concerns
[Guest]: have always been consciousness. Our main concerns have always been the human consciousness and
[Guest]: its kind of liberation. And there, I think, our own traditions have a lot to offer. And
[Guest]: because those questions are now more urgent for me as I'm growing older. So I've gone
[Guest]: back to more of those and I read, still read the Western philosophy and all, but I read
[Guest]: more of the ancients there, again, going back then the moderns. And I mean, those that journey
[Guest]: continues. But yes, this habit of reading regularly, and trying to find great books,
[Guest]: and trying to have is a background, which is just there every day of my life for the
[Guest]: last 25 years or so, pretty much. And it's just there. I mean, if there are good days
[Guest]: and bad days, there are times I'm traveling and all, but I still find at least two hours
[Amit Varma]: to read every day.
[Amit Varma]: And I should tell my listeners that when you speak about going through 6000 books, my dad
[Amit Varma]: had died last year. So in December, I had to go to the house which we were selling off
[Amit Varma]: and decide what to do with his books. And he had more than 6000 books, 6000-7000 books.
[Amit Varma]: And I had figured out a community library in Delhi to donate them to. But I thought,
[Amit Varma]: let's, let me go with three of my friends, Suyash being one of them, and ask them to
[Amit Varma]: pick out whatever they wanted. And I would pick out whatever I wanted. And then we'd
[Amit Varma]: give the rest of it away. And as kind of heartbreaking for me in the sense all his collections of
[Amit Varma]: modern library books, and everyone's classics and all of that and, and, you know, me making
[Amit Varma]: the choice to kind of give it away and not keep it because I just want to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the only physical books I took from there was stuff that I wouldn't actually find anywhere
[Amit Varma]: otherwise which are out of print or something. I can't even, you know, read it on a Kindle
[Amit Varma]: or something. So that was kind of I mean, I mean, there was a life of the mind happening
[Amit Varma]: there as well. Bunch of questions. First of those is that, how did you begin to form frames
[Amit Varma]: through which you could look at the world and explain the world? Because in my case,
[Amit Varma]: I read voraciously when it came to fiction, again came to nonfiction a bit more slowly
[Amit Varma]: and a bit later. But you know, today everyone today young people are so full of certainties
[Amit Varma]: and the internet is there and there are ideological tribes that are so appealing to join and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. But in those pre internet days in the 80s, in the early 90s, you know, it took
[Amit Varma]: a long time for me to be formed. I think I arrived broadly to where I am in terms of
[Amit Varma]: values and beliefs and all well into my adulthood, really well into my mid 20s, where I could
[Amit Varma]: even look at the country and say, Oh, these are the things that have gone wrong. This
[Amit Varma]: is what is wrong with our economics. This is wrong. What is wrong with our politics?
[Amit Varma]: I suspect if when I was 22, if you asked me what is left, what is right, I would I wouldn't
[Amit Varma]: know. Right? So tell me a little bit about how, what are the different frames that you
[Amit Varma]: began to adapt to look at the world and to, you know, begin to understand it? What was
[Amit Varma]: that process like? I mean, we are always constantly evolving, obviously. But in in the major ways,
[Amit Varma]: what are the sort of frames that were useful to you? Who were the writers who influenced
[Amit Varma]: you? Were there any phases where you felt that scales have fallen off your eyes that
[Amit Varma]: you see something with a clarity with which you hadn't seen it before, whether it is
[Amit Varma]: in the personal domain or the economic domain or the social domain?
[Guest]: Yeah, it's a, I wish you had sent me this question a few days in advance and I had thought
[Guest]: more deeply about it. But I mean, just reflecting on something you said, is that there are many
[Guest]: disadvantages of being socially shy. But one of the advantages that you don't feel the
[Guest]: need to belong to a tribe and signal anything to anyone to, to feel that you're part of
[Guest]: a particular tribe and you're not going out on, I mean, whether it's in physical setting
[Guest]: or a virtual setting to, to signal things to feel complete person, you feel pretty,
[Guest]: I mean, comfortable being a little away from any tribe and doing your own thing to the
[Guest]: extent you're doing those things. And I think that because I've always had that, so I've
[Guest]: never really needed to belong to any tribe. So I never had to, I mean, it's a good thing
[Guest]: or a bad thing. Sometimes it's a good thing that you belong to a tribe and you join and
[Guest]: you take their views. And then hopefully, if you are independent minded enough, then
[Guest]: you outgrow those, you know, there are many people who get mugged by realities and different
[Guest]: types of transformations happen. So it's a good thing, but can also be a bad thing because
[Guest]: it can end, stop thinking because you get comfortable. So I never had that. So I mean,
[Guest]: one had to find one own way. And so there are two types of beliefs. One is that where
[Guest]: you actually something very serious for you to act upon, you know, there you have to take
[Guest]: it very, very, you know, it excites a lot of due diligence because you're acting upon
[Guest]: something right. But many of the, I mean, so our act, word of action, because we're
[Guest]: not in, we're not prime ministers and we're not doing those kind of things is a limited
[Guest]: sphere right. For that you need to have a few things, you have a little bit of excellence
[Guest]: in some things and that you need to be good at.
[Guest]: The other types of beliefs are held in a different way, right. We don't act upon them. We just
[Guest]: we hold them, we revise them. It's just trying to understand, make sense of the word, you
[Guest]: know, because the old mythological understandings have broken down. The word is not so self-contained
[Guest]: in our, in a particular cosmology and we need to now remake the meanings in many ways. So
[Guest]: we need to understand to some extent or we just say it doesn't matter. It's fine. I'm
[Guest]: just going to do what, take what comes to me and move on. But if you have a longing
[Guest]: to understand then you need to keep engaging with the word and trying to have some kind
[Guest]: of working hypothesis about, you know, what's going on, you know.
[Guest]: And there I think it's a, I don't know, it's just my memories doesn't work in this way.
[Guest]: How much of it is reading, how much is observation, how much is reflection, how much was it influence
[Guest]: of others, how much was it reflection, I mean, just habit, you know, it's very hard to say.
[Guest]: But I think it was a mix of these things. So one thing that you learn from the ancients
[Guest]: in any tradition is to look at things directly and observe them and comment on them and analyze
[Guest]: them directly. Some of the moderns also do that, like Tocqueville does that very well
[Guest]: on democracy. Don't get too impressed by frames and ideologies and clever turn of phrase,
[Guest]: you know. You're a human being, you're talking about human life and human society, you can
[Guest]: look at it directly and observe and by the power of your observation and careful thinking
[Guest]: you can make sense of some of these things. Books, other people's views are useful and
[Guest]: interesting and important to kind of reflect what you are seeing and sometimes even you
[Guest]: can adapt some of those. But you need to have your own thinking, there is no substitute
[Guest]: for that. And I think that one of the things that has always helped me is an intuition
[Guest]: that I, when I look at something, I have an intuitive sense of what's going on. And then
[Guest]: I keep revising it over a long period of time. Because whatever I'm studying, I start with
[Guest]: something with like a, so I'm a rationalist, not empiricist. So I have a kind of a rational
[Guest]: view of where I'm coming from, you know, and what's going on. And then I look at data,
[Guest]: look at trying to figure out what's going on. So that's the method that I apply. And
[Guest]: it sometimes works, sometimes doesn't work, and it keeps evolving, right? It's not a,
[Guest]: there's never a permanent thing, because descriptions are not reality. Map is not the directory,
[Guest]: you know, and you're making man remapping the map. But in what I'm working on, I try
[Guest]: to be as careful as possible so that I get it right and have some, for the rest, it's
[Guest]: more like a hobby and habit and hopefully someday in some work becomes useful. But otherwise,
[Guest]: it's just a kind of a need to understand things and have a view on things like human consciousness,
[Guest]: social processes, workings of democracy, all those things which I don't directly work upon.
[Guest]: But it's something that you need to have a view on, right? Like you need to have a sense
[Guest]: of what's going on here, you know, because we are part of that reality. And you can have
[Guest]: a nuanced and reasonably complex understanding of something or you can have a very simple
[Guest]: and simplistic understanding also sometimes. And one cannot understand everything, as Saul
[Guest]: Bellows says, there's simply too much to think about, you know. And, but there are some areas,
[Guest]: some issues on which I do try to, I have tried long standing themes to understand, for example,
[Guest]: how literature works on our consciousness, the question of moral philosophy. We've already
[Guest]: discussed some of that here. Working of democracy in societies, we've touched upon it a little
[Guest]: bit. And of course, our professional life, working on political economy and all. So we're,
[Guest]: and I mean, one always lives and learns. I have actually abandoned more of my views than
[Guest]: I have now. I have been completely wrong on many, many things. In fact, in my even professional
[Guest]: work, there are so many issues on which my views are completely different from what they
[Guest]: were eight years ago, seven years ago. And that's a kind of a humbling experience, because
[Guest]: you know, you're so sure, I haven't figured it out. But then you think about it, or you
[Guest]: see new data, and you read something, or you go through an experience, and you say, oh,
[Guest]: I was completely wrong about this. I think that is something which, in fact, I've become
[Guest]: more open now than I was 15 years ago, or even 10 years ago, about how much I know,
[Guest]: and how much I know. And one of the things that one actually doesn't know much, you know,
[Guest]: that is the most fundamental humbling realization that really one doesn't really know much.
[Guest]: It's really difficult to understand even your own consciousness. Forget about social, political
[Guest]: systems, the extreme complexity, and we should be humble and modest. That's why I mean, in
[Guest]: my work, I generally suggest light touch approaches, less coercion, less political economy work
[Guest]: also, because and that's why I was so upset with decision like demonetization or something
[Guest]: will be more modest about how much you know about the word and don't do something so drastic
[Guest]: and so path breaking that you because you think you know, so I and that that is something
[Guest]: actually, it's more as I said, more recent realization that these frames are very, very
[Guest]: fragile. And when it comes to them, and when one revises them, and when one gets upset,
[Guest]: and then one has to move on and try to do better in the future, you know.
[Amit Varma]: How much of a difference do you think it made that you came from a sort of a different background
[Amit Varma]: and a different mental space to your profession than many others who are in the profession?
[Amit Varma]: Like one way in which it is different is of course, that you've gone up reading Hindi
[Amit Varma]: speaking Hindi, you've come from a different background where you've seen a different view
[Amit Varma]: of the world. I remember, you know, both Akshay Mukul and Rahul Varma, if I remember correctly,
[Amit Varma]: in the first episodes with me spoke about how they grew up reading Hindi newspapers,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore they looked at the world very differently from what
[Guest]: Yeah, I also mean, we had Dari Jagran and Amrushala coming at us.
[Amit Varma]: So that's, that's one way in which the background is different. And another way in which the
[Amit Varma]: mental makeup may be different is that you said you read a lot of fiction. And interestingly,
[Amit Varma]: English speaking elites often don't read so much, especially in these kind of policy spaces
[Amit Varma]: and all that. So that rich imaginative interior life that reading a lot of literature and
[Amit Varma]: fiction gives you is often not there and and you can sometimes be hobbled by it. So do
[Amit Varma]: you think that this made a difference to how you view the world where you would come at
[Amit Varma]: things from a different place, you would see things that others sort of may not see?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think it's different, but I don't know whether it's better, whether it's, it's
[Guest]: just a path that I happen to take. Literature was available, I read literature. And I just
[Guest]: liked it. And I really enjoyed it in terms of what it was doing to me into my inner life,
[Guest]: you know, and it put me in touch with I mean, my own kind of, you know, like you go through
[Guest]: a, it's, it sounds like a cliche, but you go through some suffering and you read Gutter's
[Guest]: Sorrow of Young Worth. Actually, it may sound like a cliche, but really it works. You know,
[Guest]: it's a comforting thing to learn about what do they say, afflict the comforted and comfort
[Guest]: the afflicted, you know, that kind of a thing. But even I mean, one is not always comforted
[Guest]: or afflicted. Usually it's somewhere in the middle. And even at that time, it's just something
[Guest]: that takes you in a different territory as far as a human possibility of thought and
[Guest]: understanding a concern, right? It's a very empathetic exercise, writing literature, it
[Guest]: comes from a place, which is not quite available to us, you and me, when we talk about or talk
[Guest]: to each other. Proust has this kind of, you know, he wrote this essay against leading
[Guest]: critic, literary critic of his time, about where literature comes from, you know, and
[Guest]: it's not the kind of self that you and I have direct access to. And it just opens up so
[Guest]: much possibility and literature, great writers know that it's more like a gift that they
[Guest]: perfect the form, obviously, they perfect the language and all of that. They work very hard
[Guest]: on it. But the source of imagination is in the subconscious. And it's kind of comes from
[Guest]: a place which is not directly accessible to them. It just comes to them, you know, like,
[Guest]: when you write like Proust, certainly, it sounds like it comes from a different kind
[Guest]: of place. And it's magic, right? It's magical. It's like some of the religious scriptures
[Guest]: you read, and they immediately hit you. And, and it just, it has that magical feeling is
[Guest]: yeah, wow. I mean, it speaks to me as if it's my personal conversation with someone that's
[Guest]: happening and great philosophers also do that. Like that's the greatness of the dramatic
[Guest]: way in which Plato writes, right? That it's drama. And of course, you can make the mistake
[Guest]: of associating with one side or the other without, I mean, understanding that you should
[Guest]: try to look at both all sides. But, but it just immediately hits you. It's not going
[Guest]: into a extreme level of qualifications. And, I mean, explaining each term in so much detail
[Guest]: that it becomes meaningless to read something like that, like some of the, I've tried to
[Guest]: wrestle with those also, but much more of a direct thing, which immediately hits you.
[Guest]: And then you have to critically think about what it is doing to you also. And, you know,
[Guest]: and yeah, so yeah, and I think it is a interesting path that to take to read broadly, widely
[Guest]: if you're so inclined and read great literature and great philosophers and great thinkers
[Guest]: in psychology and society and religious scriptures, I think are very, very powerful. I mean, I
[Guest]: wish more people read them regularly across traditions. You don't have to be narrow-minded
[Guest]: about it. There's wisdom to be had wherever there is.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit more about this because many people who will read your Plato and Aristotle
[Amit Varma]: and so on and will read sort of Western philosophy and will read these great, great novels will
[Amit Varma]: also be of a rationalist bent of mind where they will say that, you know, we don't want
[Amit Varma]: to engage with religious scriptures and at best that they might have an anthropological
[Amit Varma]: value in explaining why people thought or behaved a particular way. And that's how they
[Amit Varma]: kind of sort of think about it. But you've been speaking and our previous episode, of
[Amit Varma]: course, was on the role of religion in Indian society as well and that was very illuminating.
[Amit Varma]: But what you're sort of saying is that that's a wrong way to think of religion, that religion
[Amit Varma]: plays a central role in our society and in our existence and that if we are open to it,
[Amit Varma]: there is a lot of value to be had from religious scriptures. In fact, Pratap Bhanu Mehta once
[Amit Varma]: while speaking about his own religiosity spoke about the purest form of religion, what he
[Amit Varma]: got from the elders in his family as being a form of deep skepticism, right? So, I forget
[Amit Varma]: the exact terms he used, but it was a very sort of, it gave me a different picture into
[Amit Varma]: what an engagement with religion can be like, which was quite different from the normal,
[Amit Varma]: you know, one that is full of blind faith and superstition and idolatry and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about the role that religion has played in your life and in your
[Guest]: thinking. So, I'm not religious in the sense that I don't go to a temple regularly. I don't,
[Guest]: I mean, I pray sometimes, but it's not something which is a, but I'm more, I mean, philosophically
[Guest]: religious in that sense. So, it's much more like, so as I said that to understand the
[Guest]: nature of our consciousness to begin with and we have an unconscious and the language
[Guest]: of the unconscious is symbolic and it doesn't speak to us in the language that we speak
[Guest]: of. And I think that's the level at which religious, I mean, whether it's mythology
[Guest]: or even the more abstract texts speak to that level within us. And therefore, it's a very
[Guest]: humbling experience because the experience of religion is basically the experience of
[Guest]: the numinous, right? It's a sense of numinous and it can be represented as some God that
[Guest]: transcends the world or it's something can be represented more psychologically, some
[Guest]: people represent it or it can be represented in the sense of the Brahman that exists and
[Guest]: we are basically, I mean, our Atman is a part, it is the same as that or differently, you
[Guest]: know, there are different ways in which this has been, I mean, put in different traditions.
[Guest]: But the core common point, I think, is the experience of this numinosity, which basically
[Guest]: the religion is supposed to give you and that's a humbling experience. That's a very humbling
[Guest]: experience because you are, I mean, if you start associating with your gods, I mean,
[Guest]: psychologically, then you can have a huge ego inflation and you can actually be the
[Guest]: worst kind of religious person, you know, because while if you actually think about
[Guest]: it as one consciousness experiencing the presence of numinous, then it's a much more humbling
[Guest]: experience actually. It's much more about your journey as an individual soul or consciousness
[Guest]: or whatever you may call it, towards a particular kind of spiritual experience or like, one
[Guest]: of the things that I've always, I mean, remember whenever I think about religion, I don't think
[Guest]: about it all the time, but is that when I was like 12 or 13 years old, my family has
[Guest]: a guru, he passed away a few years ago, he was, he had an ashram in Mathura. And I asked
[Guest]: my uncle, just like a naive kid, but how do you know somebody is a guru? So, he said something
[Guest]: very interesting that the way to tell is that the guru will always or the person who's enlightened
[Guest]: will always treat everybody alike, whether it's a prime minister of the country, or somebody
[Guest]: who's completely under destitution or powerless, so to speak, he will treat everybody alike.
[Guest]: That's the one test he gave me, that if you want to know who's a real guru, he's not going
[Guest]: to treat the prime minister in a special way because of some ceremony or something, we'll
[Guest]: treat him the same way as anybody else. And that was, as a kid, it didn't mean anything
[Amit Varma]: to me. But to test this you need an available prime
[Guest]: minister. No, no, I'm just kidding. I'm just, yeah, I mean, that was a test. Prime minister
[Guest]: is one, but any level, you know, class differences, anything, skin color, all of that. So, as
[Guest]: a kid, I said, well, what does it even mean? How can you treat everybody alike? But as
[Guest]: you grow older, you realize that's the truth of it, right? When you when you're truly religious
[Guest]: or truly, I mean, spiritual in that sense, then you actually see some very humbling experience.
[Guest]: It's experience of equality in some ways, you know, that we are all in the most important
[Guest]: ways equal, you know, all the surface level differences, intelligence, wealth, all that
[Guest]: alike, in the most important ways, we're equal. And that's represented in different ways.
[Guest]: For example, in some Western traditions and Abrahamic traditions, there's some God and
[Guest]: against that you're equal. So, there's one. And in our tradition, it's different, represented
[Guest]: differently. And the experience and past are different. I'm not saying they're the same
[Guest]: thing. They're offering different paths, whether they're leading to the same thing or not,
[Guest]: I don't know. I'll experience that hopefully later in my life. I haven't, I don't have
[Guest]: the kind of religious experience that is required to comment on that. But these are the things
[Guest]: that I think are, as you actually practice this thing and think about it and engage with
[Guest]: it seriously, that this is what it is. And I mean, one doesn't have to, but I link it
[Guest]: to democracy also in some senses that, you know, these are the kind of values in some
[Guest]: ways that democracy could use more of, you know, that a guru who teaches, who treats
[Guest]: everybody alike, a citizen who genuinely and deeply experiences equality, you know, and
[Guest]: not pays too much attention to the surface level differences that exist between us.
[Guest]: And that's something actually. So, I've also gone through many phases. I had a very naive
[Guest]: belief early on, which was as a kid, you know, like literally every day pray, there's Lord
[Guest]: Shiva, there's this, you know, there was deities to bow in front of and it's a ritual, much
[Guest]: more of a ritual. It still comforts and calms me very much. But that I kind of outgrew in
[Guest]: my 20s itself. Like I didn't have that kind of a naive belief anymore. So then I had a
[Guest]: long march back. That march is too long to talk about here. Hopefully, once the march
[Guest]: is complete, I'll have something to say about it. But it's been a long, long march.
[Amit Varma]: Once the march is complete, you will be giving five hour slots to every podcaster because
[Amit Varma]: you have to treat everyone equally. So, where are we then? So, you know, earlier, I'd asked
[Amit Varma]: about whether your background set you apart from the other sort of people you worked with
[Amit Varma]: in the policy space or the quote unquote, intellectual circles of Delhi. Let me come
[Amit Varma]: at that question from another angle, where one fixes the lens on the intellectual elites
[Amit Varma]: of Delhi, as it were. You've written this lovely essay on Tocqueville, which of course
[Amit Varma]: I'll link from the show notes, where you quote Blaise Pascal as saying early on quote, what
[Amit Varma]: a great advantage to be of noble birth, since it gives a man of 18, the standing recognition
[Amit Varma]: and respect that another man might not earn before he was 50. That means winning 30 years
[Amit Varma]: start with no effort, stop quote. And this, of course, is a comment on privilege of sorts
[Amit Varma]: that we should be aware of. But it's also a comment on how so many of these intellectual
[Amit Varma]: elites and policy elites and all of that, everything kind of just fell into the lap,
[Amit Varma]: they were born in a particular place in a particular time, perhaps in a particular family.
[Amit Varma]: And this was an easy sort of route to take, you do your PhD in a foreign university, perhaps,
[Amit Varma]: in the course of things, you come back a quote unquote, expert in a particular subject with
[Amit Varma]: a particular kind of lens, which is the fashionable lens at the time, which might have been acquired
[Amit Varma]: from wherever you studied and all of that. And you're on a groove, and it's a set groove,
[Amit Varma]: and it's a set path. And it is natural when one is on that path to not gain epistemic
[Amit Varma]: humility, or, you know, not to use fancy terms, but to not gain the humility to recognize
[Amit Varma]: that you're often wrong, that maybe the lens that you were indoctrinated with might be
[Amit Varma]: the wrong lens might be simplistic, might be looking at the wrong things, that there
[Amit Varma]: is more to the world that you have to, you know, first engage in good faith, and with
[Amit Varma]: respect, different points of view, that, you know, you can't just sit back and pass judgment
[Amit Varma]: on people all the time, you have to make that effort to get down and dirty and really understand
[Amit Varma]: what's going on. And everything that I'm saying sounds incredibly harsh, but it's certainly
[Amit Varma]: my view of a lot of the so called Latins elite that I see around me. And that is one thing
[Amit Varma]: that I think Modi is absolutely right on. I think, you know, as everybody knows, I've
[Amit Varma]: opposed Modi so strongly that I've been mobbed, I've faced threats, all that shit has happened,
[Amit Varma]: you know, especially after I opposed him on from day one. So I'm like, at one level, the
[Amit Varma]: biggest opponent in the policy sphere, but he's right about this. And this is perhaps
[Amit Varma]: one reason that, you know, there are a lot of people instinctively support him on this
[Amit Varma]: issue, because there is that sort of understanding that our data clueless elites led us down
[Amit Varma]: the wrong path, tried to reshape our country in a way that, you know, wasn't in consonance
[Amit Varma]: with what the country really was. And what is happening today is pushback. So give me
[Amit Varma]: a sense of these elites because and I don't want to sort of make it sound as if every
[Amit Varma]: individual who works with you is a scoundrel or something like that. You know, I know many
[Amit Varma]: of these individuals, I am in a sense one of the privileged elites, many of these people
[Amit Varma]: are my friends. But there is a systemic problem that we keep going on and on about an idea
[Amit Varma]: of India that has nothing to do with India. And that we never did the hard work of trying
[Amit Varma]: to shape this country and shape it from within the culture and from within society instead
[Amit Varma]: top down bat gay humne socha ki bus, you know, hum apne high ideal se sab kuch badal denge
[Amit Varma]: like the, you know, like like earlier, you were speaking of hypothetical constitution
[Amit Varma]: law or lawyers who don't really want to engage in the dirty work of politics, but just change
[Amit Varma]: it from their pedestals and ivory towers. So tell me a little bit about sort of this
[Amit Varma]: community and I suspect you're going to be very diplomatic because you are after all,
[Amit Varma]: in their midst.
[Guest]: Yeah, who wants to be a class enemy? But yeah, I mean, so you said earlier that politics
[Guest]: is corrupting, you know, but intellectualism is far more corrupting, you know, because
[Guest]: if your job is to describe and understand the word and basically make a recommendation
[Guest]: how to make and remake it, it's impossible to be actually, it's a very unnatural thing,
[Guest]: right? It's a very unnatural thing to do to be done at scale. You know, when you think
[Guest]: about large society, complex adaptive systems, which are kind of evolving and emerging, and
[Guest]: you try to describe them in a way which is not sufficiently complex in representing that
[Guest]: reality and is much more of a top down perspective of it, then it's impossible to get it right.
[Guest]: I mean, for the most part, unless you completely reorient yourself and talk in a language which
[Guest]: is respecting of the complexity of that reality, and whether it's a social reality or economic
[Guest]: or political, different spheres, and all of them are overlapping, all of that. So it is
[Guest]: extremely difficult. And one of the most common things that all of us fall to different degrees
[Guest]: is intellectual pride, you know, that just because we know a little, we have read a little,
[Guest]: and we have, we can quote a few serious, we can, from Dworkin to Kant, we can quote people
[Guest]: who sound serious. We think that we have some special knowledge, you know, it's something
[Guest]: that the best of us have, can fall for. And, I mean, so have I, I mean, it's not like I've
[Guest]: never said anything about let's do this in this way, you know, which underwent many,
[Guest]: many assumptions behind it, right. There was not a, it was the recommendations based on
[Guest]: things that one thought one knew, and then later one thought that maybe one was not right
[Guest]: about it. So it's, the fundamental thing is that it's very hard to do this, you know,
[Guest]: that think tanks, and working in bringing intellectualism to this is, is to begin with
[Guest]: very difficult to get it right. But, I mean, there are obviously, as you said, many shades
[Guest]: of this, like if you work closely with people who have a sense of constraints, you're working
[Guest]: on specific problems that you're trying to solve in a democratic way, the role of the
[Guest]: intellectual or expert in democracy is a very small role, you know, it's a very limited
[Guest]: role. Democratic processes are basically, there is a system which has been put in place
[Guest]: constitutionally. And that system has its own internal logic to working. And even if
[Guest]: you forget about the constitutional system, and the words that are put in the constitution,
[Guest]: that's not so important. The important thing is the reality of the way societies work.
[Guest]: And the society will support certain kinds of constitutional practices and oppose certain
[Guest]: constitutional and nothing you can do about it because the people are sovereign, you know,
[Guest]: that's the fundamental thing. Everything else is just language games on top of that. So,
[Guest]: so you have, you have that and so you have to define your role in a manner which is more
[Guest]: modest and you're trying to frame issues, you're trying to bring out facts for people's
[Guest]: attention for the experts and for the policy makers' attentions. Policy makers have legitimacy,
[Guest]: right? Because politicians get elected, they are empowered to take decisions, they don't
[Guest]: have to go and do a referendum every time. There are some limited amount of power for
[Guest]: which they have some power, limited amount of time for which they have some power. And
[Guest]: they can take a decision, you can give them all some alternatives about these are different
[Guest]: ways, pros and cons. It's they still have to go and figure out what will politically
[Guest]: be feasible or not. They have to ask their constituents sometimes, at least some stakeholders
[Guest]: about what would work, what would not. So, there is a role, you know, on shedding lights
[Guest]: on facts, analyzing facts, but that is, you stop there and then you start, I mean, you
[Guest]: accept that there is a democratic process through which things will happen. And you
[Guest]: will often be disappointed. I worked on one particular reform for three years. Three years
[Guest]: I've devoted to that one issue in my previous job. It was to reform a particular kind of
[Guest]: do a particular financial sector reform on bankruptcy of financial firms. And after three
[Guest]: years, it was withdrawn. I mean, in fact, from the parliament, the bill was withdrawn.
[Guest]: And that's it. I mean, there was a democratic process. There was some opposition. And I
[Guest]: believe there was some wisdom in the government's decision to withdraw it. It wasn't the right
[Guest]: time perhaps. My intellectual vanity was certainly hurt that, hey, I have worked on this and
[Guest]: I was a very small part of it. I'm not elected. I'm not even an IAS officer. I'm working inside
[Guest]: a system which has its own kind of ways of working. I have some bit of expertise. I've
[Guest]: done research in that area for many years and I've worked on it for at least six, seven
[Guest]: years even previously. So I had some ideas, but that's, I mean, a very, I mean, those
[Guest]: ideas are not there for, nobody's waiting for those ideas to come. Oh, wow, you've now
[Guest]: saved me, you know. So that I think is, is very important. The most important thing to
[Guest]: avoid is intellectual pride, which all of us usually fall for. And I think the best
[Guest]: way to avoid is to accept that you don't know. You don't know anything actually pretty much.
[Guest]: But there are also other kind of problems that emerge in the way these things are happening
[Guest]: that there are more localized games, right, that some intellectual and some politicians
[Guest]: are in a happy relationship like, okay, I'll give you certain ideas that look very good
[Guest]: on surface, we'll give you some short term wins. And the politicians say, yes, it sounds
[Guest]: something I can work with. Whether the long term impact will be good or not is something
[Guest]: which there the intellectual actually has a duty to actually do the right kind of advice
[Guest]: and not get too political about it that, okay, what will help this person win elections only.
[Guest]: That's obviously a constraint that the person has to worry about, the politicians to worry
[Guest]: about. Intellectuals worry about the general equilibrium impact, you know, about what are
[Guest]: the common good, how and long term how it how it will be served. I think there are quite
[Guest]: a few compromises often made. I mean, by individuals, it's not a comment on everybody. There are
[Guest]: lots of people who are who don't do it like that. But I think if some distance is maintained,
[Guest]: some principle distance is maintained, and you say, okay, I'm here to do research and
[Guest]: put out analysis and ideas. And it's a privilege, right, to be paid to read and think and write
[Guest]: and analyze things. And I'm not playing the power game so much, you know, then it's more
[Guest]: kind of an endishing for both sides, I think, whether intellectual class can serve the political
[Guest]: class better and political class can benefit from the from the intellectual expertise better.
[Guest]: And also, I mean, you can be true to your fear. And these are, this is what breaks down
[Guest]: often because everything is political, you know, there is a person is a political, this
[Guest]: is political, that is political, everything is political, then I mean, is there anything
[Guest]: else which is to be considered or is power, the only thing that really matters. And so,
[Guest]: as I said, intellectual pride is one thing, but also greed, in some ways, you know, hunger
[Guest]: for power that can can get into this and epistemic humility is then shaped by all these other
[Guest]: things, right? Like if you are really in it for the reason of Seva, so to speak, service,
[Guest]: then you will sooner or later figure out that you were wrong and you don't understand much.
[Guest]: And therefore, you need to be humble and you will you need to know that you are just one
[Guest]: citizen among 1.4 billion, all of them have the same vote, just because you read a little
[Guest]: bit, you don't know much. In fact, reading is one way to understand the world. And data
[Guest]: analysis is one way to understand the world. Experience is another, business people know
[Guest]: a lot, I talked to a lot of business people, they have a lot more wisdom over in the political
[Guest]: economy that all the political economy researchers put together, including me, some of them,
[Guest]: not all, because those who reflect about their world and who have lived through the last
[Guest]: 30 years of Indian economy and have thought about it deeply. Some of the civil servants
[Guest]: have deep wisdom about, politicians generally have a lot of wisdom about how the society
[Guest]: works and what is possible, what is not possible, most of them actually.
[Guest]: So, I think a much more of a modesty is required from this class, I think, and a little bit
[Guest]: more honesty about what our role is. And again, being true to the virtues of being an analyst
[Guest]: and intellectual or a thinker, or a researcher in policy space. I think generally, quite
[Guest]: a few people do have that. I worked with quite a few of them, I still work with some of them.
[Guest]: And I admire them, I learn from them, I am trying to do to be like, more like them. And
[Guest]: I mean, I need to see more role models of that type. And so, otherwise, if you are only
[Guest]: looking for power, or a lot more attention all the time, the whole thing is going in
[Guest]: the direction of eyeballs, the game is of eyeballs, getting more and more views, and
[Guest]: getting access, access comes at a cost, it is not so easy.
[Guest]: So, but that is the game, everybody, the philanthropists pay for access and impact and all of that.
[Guest]: So, there is a complex system in which different things have to realign a little to get good
[Guest]: practices flourishing and bad practices diminishing in this, as it is in other domains. And overall,
[Guest]: I think the space is expanded, there are now more think tanks and universities, more things
[Guest]: to be done, more specialized areas of work also, somebody wants to do on tech policy
[Guest]: can do tech policy, other areas.
[Guest]: But ultimately, I think, because you are here to serve society, you have to first understand
[Guest]: the society a little bit, like try to make sense of, I mean, maybe all the major premises,
[Guest]: you know, like in major premise, minor premise inclusion. So, you all the major premises
[Guest]: do not come from you only, right? People have their own preferences, like they want to,
[Guest]: they want certain things, why are you here to impose your values upon them to transform
[Guest]: their lives, you know, who are you, you are one citizen. And to get that through shortcuts
[Guest]: that I will get this one, I mean, order passed or something is really, I mean, vitiating
[Guest]: the democratic atmosphere.
[Guest]: And in some ways, I mean, I think Mr. Modi goes overboard in his populist rhetoric. But
[Guest]: it is a symbol, right? Just think about it. He said Khan market, how many people in India
[Guest]: know Khan market? Only people, it is a Delhi thing, right? But it somehow resonates in
[Guest]: other parts also, because every place has its Khan market. You know, and there's something
[Guest]: to be said about that kind of rhetoric working. Why with working? So, it's, and therefore,
[Guest]: I think there is some need to understand why something like this work. I'm not, I don't
[Guest]: think populist politics is a good thing. In democracy, it's a perversion of democracy.
[Guest]: And but democracy is perverted in many ways, not just populism.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I think just speculating aloud, when I look at either some of the Latvians
[Amit Varma]: elite, or whether I look at many people taking harsh stride in strands on Twitter, for example,
[Amit Varma]: I see two simultaneous, you know, things driving this. And one is intellectual laziness, that
[Amit Varma]: you've arrived at a frame through which you look at the world. And now you don't want
[Amit Varma]: to put in the cognitive energy to modify that frame, or to engage with other ways of looking
[Amit Varma]: at the world, or to enter a deep, meaningful discourse where you're not lecturing someone,
[Amit Varma]: but you're actually engaging with them. And the second drive is a drive to sanctimony,
[Amit Varma]: that you know, it makes all of us feel virtuous if you're giving lectures on morality to others,
[Amit Varma]: if you're condemning others, if you're passing judgment, and that sort of becomes problematic.
[Guest]: So like, I mean, see, this is happening because of influence, we want to influence. Influence
[Guest]: requires certainty, at least appearance of certainty, even if you may be a little bit
[Guest]: doubt inside, you have to appear that you're certain so that you can make a claim. To make
[Guest]: a claim, you need to appear at least somewhat sure yourself, right? Otherwise, why would
[Guest]: other person say that there's something worth listening to? And so one thing is epistemic
[Guest]: certainty, other is moral superiority. That is also required for influence, because you
[Guest]: have to not just say that you're sure about this, so this is a morally better thing to
[Guest]: do. And both are actually, if you think carefully, are important for influence, but also in a
[Guest]: way intellectually and morally corrupting in some senses that you have to pretend to
[Guest]: have a particular position, which you may actually inside you have many doubts about.
[Amit Varma]: Great point. The first time we met, we met in Bombay, our mutual friend Kumar Anand,
[Amit Varma]: God bless his soul, introduced us. God bless him. He's alive, by the way, we are talking
[Amit Varma]: like he's very much alive. Shout out to Kumar. And I think we met at Khar Social, was it?
[Amit Varma]: And some place. And one of the things that immediately you and I were on exactly the
[Amit Varma]: same page was demonetization, where both of us felt equally strongly. And we both agreed
[Amit Varma]: that it was a litmus test for us. Key, you know, whether you're really a liberal or you're
[Amit Varma]: not in terms of, you know, the classical sense of the word liberal. And I later wrote a piece
[Amit Varma]: called the Beware of the Useful Idiots, which was an editorial for the online magazine I
[Amit Varma]: edited Pragati, where my argument was that any economist who supported demonetization
[Amit Varma]: was either a bad economist or a bad human being, because demon was just so evidently
[Amit Varma]: daft and dangerous. And like I keep saying, the largest attack on property rights in human
[Amit Varma]: history. And, and that also shows how some of our intellectual elites are not driven
[Amit Varma]: by what they project as a power of ideas or believing in certain principles, but rather
[Amit Varma]: other kinds of contingencies, like many of the people who supported demon were people
[Amit Varma]: who had allied themselves with the government, because they thought key TK, you know, they'll
[Amit Varma]: bring about the change we want, at least that was their reasoning then. But even when they
[Amit Varma]: saw that this government was far more status than previous ones, and we're thinking and
[Amit Varma]: we're doing completely daft and dangerous things like demonetization, they continued
[Amit Varma]: rationalizing that they continued supporting that, at one hand, of course, the government
[Amit Varma]: had given out this order to all its house dogs, as it were, that, you know, defend demon.
[Amit Varma]: But many of them did it. Many of them actually did it. Many of them wrote columns and came
[Amit Varma]: on TV, supporting demonetization, when you and I know that they knew that it was a disaster.
[Amit Varma]: And yet they, you know, willfully lied. And that makes me and there are two thoughts connected
[Amit Varma]: with this. And one is that a lot of what people claim to believe in is a front to themselves
[Amit Varma]: and to others. And people are more tribal than they are principled, by and large, with
[Guest]: exceptions.
[Guest]: Yeah, we are also in, to some extent, I mean, let's not have an assumption in this conversation
[Amit Varma]: that you and I are morally superior to others, you know, that is one part of the community.
[Amit Varma]: Let me finish. So no, the thing is, just to address that, and that's, which is why I don't
[Amit Varma]: like labels being attached to me anymore. And which is why, you know, why does a person
[Amit Varma]: like me, I mean, in a sense, I have no friends, right, in that, in the ideological space,
[Amit Varma]: because I'm, I've attacked everyone, because I'm just going by my principles. It doesn't
[Amit Varma]: mean that there is no circumstance in which I won't compromise, who knows, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: put me in a dungeon, and you torture me and you make me watch Shahrukh Khan movies all
[Amit Varma]: day, even I will bend at some point. But, but in general, we've avoided tribalism, which
[Amit Varma]: is something I can, you know, confidently say, whereas, and this is something I'm lamenting,
[Amit Varma]: I'm not, you know, I'm just lamenting that, like earlier, you said that we do things for
[Amit Varma]: reasons that we ourselves may not understand, you know, what is going on in our subconscious,
[Amit Varma]: we don't know most of it. So that's sort of one thing I saw during that, that kind of
[Amit Varma]: made me feel that, you know, people are more tribal than their principled, even when they
[Amit Varma]: appear principled. We saw this in the US with the Republican Party, where so many Republicans
[Amit Varma]: supported Trump, despite the fact that Trump stood against so many of the principles of
[Amit Varma]: the Republican Party, like on trade, for example, where his positions are identical to Bernie
[Amit Varma]: Sanders. So is this something that kind of strikes you that people have chosen sides,
[Amit Varma]: and they are going with those sides? Is it, is nuance therefore difficult in these times
[Amit Varma]: for a person like you who works in the sphere of ideas?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, as I said, that there's a cost in terms of some influence that you have to
[Guest]: pay in the, at least for some time, maybe forever, because, I mean, the times are such
[Guest]: that if you want to be autonomous, you will be isolated. So, and it's just two sides of
[Guest]: the same coin right now, but the times can change. And when demonetization was a very
[Guest]: disappointing time, because many people I know who should know better, I mean, still
[Guest]: said something different from what I, it was apparent to me, I mean, what was going on
[Guest]: and the harm that it would do not just in terms of direct harm, but also unsettling
[Guest]: the assumptions about the way policies are made in India and implemented the process
[Guest]: and kind of diligence that is gone and the direction of India's policymaking in some
[Guest]: ways was completely, it was a shock event to that, right. There was a general directionality
[Guest]: of more openness and liberality, a little bit more policy certainty they were trying
[Guest]: to establish. Even they, between 2014 and 16, the government had stabilized the economy
[Guest]: in many ways, they had taken quite a few sensible decisions. And suddenly, two and a half years
[Guest]: into the government, this thing was announced, and I wish there had been more civil society,
[Guest]: at least among intellectual economies, there had been a little bit more skepticism about
[Guest]: even trying something like this. And I think more than economics, economics can justify
[Guest]: many things, because it depends on the assumptions you make about the future, right. So, future
[Guest]: assumption of analysis of future impact, and which variables you consider. So, some people
[Guest]: highlight the digitization and all of that. It is more full political philosophy, right.
[Guest]: What is the political philosophy that you have that you would support a decision like
[Guest]: this, you know, as a citizen, and that to take in such a way, you know, which was completely
[Guest]: certain, arbitrary, and in my view, at least harmful and wrong. So, but that is the thing.
[Guest]: Everybody has their reasons. They have their reasons to do what they do. But I agree that
[Guest]: wherever tribalism comes in, tribalism becomes a reason. And then it substitutes many other
[Guest]: reasons, you know, the reasoning and the rationality that should go into at least for people like
[Guest]: us who are in that luxurious space of thinking carefully, analyzing data and having scenarios
[Guest]: of the future and seeing what are the plausible scenarios, typical way in which you do policy
[Guest]: analysis. If you have that, and you don't excise that, it's much more tribalism, it's
[Guest]: harmful. That's why I think that, yes, politics is very important. It is the main way in which
[Guest]: you organize society. Politicians are the ones who have greatest legitimacy in a democratic
[Guest]: setting to take decisions and all of that. And democracy has rewarded that decision in
[Guest]: some ways. They have won the election and all of that. And it's very important and that
[Guest]: is the way in which our society settles these questions. I mean, there is nothing else.
[Guest]: But each one of us has our duty, right, to when we think that something is going to do
[Guest]: some harm, and we have some basis to say that and we have thought carefully about it, then
[Guest]: we put it out and hopefully some people will listen to it, some course correction will
[Guest]: happen and all of that. And that is our role. And whether democracy will listen to us, whether
[Guest]: people will listen to us, whether the politicians will listen to us, is not something that we
[Guest]: can really control. We are, I mean, our influence is a matter of more of our time than our own
[Guest]: self, what happens with the ideas that we have. And so I humbly say that you and I,
[Guest]: I for sure thought it was a harmful decision, not just in the short term cost, but also
[Guest]: the long term impact on the political economy of India. It disrupted many things that were
[Guest]: underpinning our growth, in my view. And, but reasonable people always disagree. I mean,
[Guest]: some reasonable people can disagree about the economics of it. But the political philosophy,
[Guest]: the kind of citizens, perspectives that came out, I thought, because the way it was presented,
[Guest]: it was like a fight against corruption, right. It was a sacrificial kind of a process through
[Guest]: which you fight and cleanse your body politic of corruption. And that became very difficult
[Guest]: to oppose for many people. Politically appeared like if you are opposing demonetization, opposing
[Guest]: corruption. You know, people like us who wrote about it in a critical way, analytically,
[Guest]: I mean, we had to go to extra lengths to say that we are not supporting corruption, quote
[Guest]: unquote. Corruption is a complicated business. And we can come to talk about that a little
[Guest]: later if you want, what is corruption and what is not. But at that time, it was a pretty
[Guest]: binary situation. And quite a few people, I mean, disappointingly, for tribal reasons
[Guest]: or for reasons of appearing virtuous at that time, basically said that, hey, this is at
[Guest]: least it's an experiment worth trying. Or they said that this is, this is going to work,
[Guest]: you know, all of that, which without offering enough evidence of why it may be. And even
[Guest]: now, there are lots of people who defend that decision. Even after these many years, they
[Guest]: still think that it worked. So, I guess, there's a possibility that I may be wrong about it.
[Guest]: And I have to accept that, because I don't know everything, obviously. But I still hold
[Guest]: the view that it was the wrong decision.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, absolutely. And like you said, we still have to do what we have to do, even if there's
[Amit Varma]: a, it seems futile. The dharma of the wolf is to howl at the moon. How's that for a line?
[Guest]: Dharma?
[Amit Varma]: Of the wolf is to howl at the moon.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Right. So, let's get back to your
[Guest]: Or in the way Bellow puts it. Bellow writes about that dog who's looking up about what
[Guest]: is he thinking? And, you know, he's, you know, he's ruminating on the limitations of the
[Guest]: canine condition and asking the God to open the universe a little more.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, actually, dogs behave with a lot more. I think dogs are perhaps less self delusional
[Amit Varma]: than humans in the sense that no dog would really do that. Right. So let's get back to
[Amit Varma]: your sort of personal story. And what I know of your past is really from when you joined
[Amit Varma]: NIPFP in 2011. And, you know, worked with the finance ministry after that eventually
[Amit Varma]: joined Carnegie in 2018. But get, bring me to a sense of your journey in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: what was your early conception of yourself and what brought you to NIPFP to begin with?
[Amit Varma]: And just give me a sense of, you know, how did you look at yourself and the things you
[Amit Varma]: wanted to do and so on and so forth?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I actually didn't have a plan to get into the policy space. I just met this
[Guest]: person, who was at NIPFP, he was a professor at NIPFP, Ajay, you know, that we were common
[Guest]: friends. And he had come to a conference that I'd organized in my previous job, I'd helped
[Guest]: organize and on financial system reforms. And at that time, a commission was being set
[Guest]: up, Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Commission, and they were looking for researchers to work
[Guest]: on that. And he made me an offer to come and join and work for the commission. It was two
[Guest]: year commission, so a good amount of time to work on something. Usually policy work
[Guest]: often gets done in very short period of time. And it's not very satisfying, because it's
[Guest]: very short turnaround time, but this was a two year thing. So I thought it'd be interesting
[Guest]: to do it for two years and then come back and do work, go into private sector or whatever
[Guest]: it was, microfinance or anything that I mean, whatever the experience at that time working
[Guest]: on. So I joined in 2011, basically, National Institute of Public Finance and Policy, which
[Guest]: is a, I mean, basically a policy research shop. But it's an autonomous body promoted
[Guest]: by the government. So it's, you work mainly with the government, closely with the government,
[Guest]: and you do some research also, I mean, of your own. And I stayed there for almost eight
[Guest]: years. And the main work there was to do policy research. I worked on different, I mean, projects,
[Guest]: I worked with different ministries and departments and government agencies. And I really enjoyed
[Guest]: that work. So what I had thought I'd do for two years, I ended up doing for eight years.
[Amit Varma]: And so give me a sense of the insides of the beast. How does government work? Like, you
[Amit Varma]: know, NIPFP, of course, worked closely with the finance ministry, you were a consultant
[Guest]: for the finance ministry, for a short period, for a short period later on. So how does government
[Amit Varma]: work? Because the general sense that you have from the outside is of, you know, very sclerotic,
[Amit Varma]: very slow, bureaucratic, a lot of discussion, not much gets done, committee by committee,
[Amit Varma]: all of that. But give me a sense from the inside of how it works. And how was it like,
[Amit Varma]: what were your expectations of it going in? And what did you discover once you were there,
[Amit Varma]: which was different from what you had expected?
[Guest]: So I actually didn't have a very clearly formed view of what the government would be, you
[Guest]: know, there were some stereotypes, but I mean, not much of a hard view as such. And when
[Guest]: I had a bit of a soft landing, because I worked for a commission, not directly with a ministry
[Guest]: or department or agency of government work with a commission, which was an expert body,
[Guest]: set up under a former Supreme Court judge. And we had a very good leading economist,
[Guest]: former regulators, experts, and a good bunch of researchers working together, mostly lawyers
[Guest]: and economists, I was an outsider, I'm neither a lawyer nor an economist, a bit of an odd
[Guest]: one out there. But I really enjoyed working and learned a lot from these lawyers, and
[Guest]: economists and the regulators and the civil servants and also the judge who was leading
[Guest]: it. And it was a soft landing, because although it was work for a government policy research,
[Guest]: I mean, reform project, it wasn't in the heart of the beast, so to speak, you know, that
[Guest]: you're not actually changing policy immediately, it's just research and analysis and presenting
[Guest]: a set of ideas that may work, you know, that was the thing. And it was two years, so two
[Guest]: years is a good time to do this, you know, it's a right amount of time to think about
[Guest]: a problem and a set of problems. And I worked on a couple of areas intensively in that collaborated
[Guest]: with some people and learned a lot from them. And some of those people had been doing policy
[Guest]: research for years earlier. And then actually, after that, I had a more direct interaction.
[Guest]: So again, my role was very small, to be very, very clear, it's a research policy researcher,
[Guest]: right? You're not a decision maker, you're not an IAS officer, you're not a politician,
[Guest]: you didn't need to get elected, nor did you crack a difficult exam many years ago. So
[Guest]: you are here to provide analysis. And so when the commission submitted its report, it became
[Guest]: about implementation. So parts of it was taken and implemented in some ways, inflation targeting
[Guest]: grew out of it in some ways. There was a reform of capital controls that was done where powers
[Guest]: are divided between government and RBI. Some reforms have come out of that process. And
[Guest]: it was basically done by bureaucrats. So joint secretary is a key rank and joint secretaries
[Guest]: are the ones who drive the world because they had a division and then secretaries have to
[Guest]: support ministers to support many things go to the cabinet for approval. And one of the
[Guest]: main things about government is that it's a relatively low capacity organization. It
[Guest]: really struggles. It's a very difficult thing to do things because you don't have the kind
[Guest]: of capacity. They are smart officers inside who really know a lot or at least have the
[Guest]: capacity to quickly pick up because they have moved from one department to another which
[Guest]: completely unrelated subjectivity, they quickly pick up. But the below director level, I mean,
[Guest]: bureaucracy is very, very weak. I mean, in terms of just a number of people also the
[Guest]: kind of quality that you get in terms of training that you provide them the kind of expertise
[Guest]: that they have. So it's a constant struggle to do anything. So they do value outsiders
[Guest]: like us who are working in a semi-sarkari government kind of think tank and helping
[Guest]: them out. So they did value and there was a lot of kind of interest in from secretary,
[Guest]: joint secretary, minister to kind of get help and get some support, research support and
[Guest]: analytical support to push things forward a little bit.
[Guest]: And so one thing that happened when I was working in this area, I will talk more about
[Guest]: other things that I did, is that I developed a lot of empathy for people who work in government,
[Guest]: whether it's the ministers or the IAS officers that I really felt that it's a very difficult
[Guest]: situation and they are taking, partly they are responsible for it because government
[Guest]: of India has taken on too many responsibilities and for us, for our stage of development,
[Guest]: it is trying to take on too many things and more things than it should. I mean, we should
[Guest]: have a much smaller things of set of issues that government is trying to solve and others
[Guest]: you should just leave to civil society and market organize markets and accept it.
[Guest]: But some for reasons which I don't fully understand, our democracy makes many, many demands and
[Guest]: for reasons that again, I don't understand, our political leadership is not able to raise
[Guest]: those demands. So Ministry of Agriculture is a state subject, it has 30 joint secretaries.
[Guest]: So why should a government of India have 30 joint secretaries working in a ministry which
[Guest]: is a state subject because, but still they are not going to raise these demands. So,
[Guest]: I mean, again, as I said democracy, so there are things that are done which our intellectual
[Guest]: worldview may find a little odd or inefficient, but allocative efficiency may appear bad,
[Guest]: but it is done. So it's very difficult because you got a small number of IAS officers and
[Guest]: a small number of other civil servants, revenue services, audit accounts and all that who
[Guest]: have to do a lot of these things and the bureaucracy, low bureaucracy is very, very weak. Also,
[Guest]: I mean, in the 90s, there was a drop in the hiring of IAS officers to the UPSC process.
[Guest]: So again, that middle bureaucracy is very, very small and same number of same officers
[Guest]: basically going around and doing things. So that was a one big, I mean, change is becoming
[Guest]: more empathetic and understanding of the constraints.
[Guest]: So one of the most important things in government is to understand the constraints within which
[Guest]: things are done. James Q. Wilson, the great political scientist has a great book on bureaucracy,
[Guest]: it's worth reading, everybody should read it. So his whole frame is to understand government
[Guest]: through constraints, you know, that there are things you should never compare a government
[Guest]: organization with a private organization and don't have a simplistic thing that some private
[Guest]: CEO will come and transform government, cannot be done because they can add value for sure,
[Guest]: but for that they have to first be empathetic towards the situation of the government. Government
[Guest]: cannot hire or fire, government cannot procure freely from wherever, it has to follow due
[Guest]: process. Government cannot just decide without following a very complex set of laws, there
[Guest]: is also jurisprudence. And there are many things that the government is held to, and
[Guest]: the government doesn't really choose its own priorities. There is a complex democratic
[Guest]: process through which priorities are chosen, they can change. You start working on a policy
[Guest]: project and then government changes and suddenly the priorities have changed. These are very
[Guest]: significant constraints and you see that when you actually work in the government, you see
[Guest]: how things happen. So, in fact, some of the most satisfying work I did was this commission
[Guest]: called Expenditure Management Commission. I was coordinating research for the whole
[Guest]: commission which was again two years and we looked at the entire central government expenditure
[Guest]: and trying to understand how its operational efficiency can be improved, not allocative.
[Guest]: Allocative is political business, but in a way can we do a little better implementation
[Guest]: and trying to get more bang for the buck, so to speak. The report is not public, so
[Guest]: I can't talk anything about it at all. It's still confidential, but I am talking about
[Guest]: the process. So, there the commission was basically led by a senior economist and also
[Guest]: a former public servant. It had another economist as a member, it had some couple of bureaucrats,
[Guest]: one serving, one retired as members and then the team, research team was basically, I mean
[Guest]: the staff was mostly all civil servants and what I really enjoyed about working in that
[Guest]: commission was that I could have a sense of where the binding constraints are. See, that's
[Guest]: one of the most important things in policy is that you may have some abstract notion
[Guest]: of here is a system and there it should be, but what is the next step?
[Guest]: See, you can have some UK is doing this, US is doing thing that, but you can't go from
[Guest]: here to some of that and maybe that is not the right path for you because your path is
[Guest]: different and therefore you can take a different kind of optimal path, but there is a next
[Guest]: step and that is about easing the binding constraints that are most important right
[Guest]: now and people who are in the thick of things, these are civil servants and if they are reflective
[Guest]: and thoughtful and if you work closely with them, they know that very well. I mean, if
[Guest]: they get the opportunity to reflect on it and like which we did for two years, we got
[Guest]: an opportunity to reflect and think about what can be done to improve government procurement,
[Guest]: expenditure efficiency in health and education, expenditure efficiency, subsidies, all subsidies,
[Guest]: all of that stuff that we looked at, public enterprise, autonomous body, everything, defence,
[Guest]: all of that and then you actually have a sense that you are talking to something which matters
[Guest]: now and not painting some, you know, most of the policy work is basically best practice
[Guest]: type. Hey, look at this UK, US did it and do five countries study and then why does
[Guest]: India do this? There are many things that these countries do that we do not do, you
[Guest]: know, we are in the bottom third in the world in per capita income and in almost all measures
[Guest]: we are, I mean, in the bottom half in the world. So, why compare only with Frontier?
[Guest]: And not even compare with others, look at your own path and say, okay, where can we
[Guest]: go next? And that is where I think this, because these civil servants, the good ones who are
[Guest]: reflective and have opportunity to think about these things, work with researchers closely,
[Guest]: they can identify the binding constraints and find an optimal next step, which is what
[Guest]: matters. Ultimately, you have to evolve to the next step, then the next step after and
[Guest]: then in a generation or two, many, many problems will get solved. If you try to say that the
[Guest]: ultimate objective, which anyway you cannot say, right, you do not, you cannot see what
[Guest]: would be the right institutional design, you know, it is not a, again, you will fall for
[Guest]: the planning and top down design kind of a trap. So, yeah, the understanding of constraints,
[Guest]: empathy for difficulty of capacity and political demands and all of that. The most disappointing
[Guest]: was that work that I did on the reform of financial resolution, where for three years
[Guest]: I was at it as a researcher only, it was a small role, but I was really at the thick
[Guest]: of it, in the thick of it, working on it almost continuously. And at the last moment when
[Guest]: it had to be passed, it got withdrawn from the parliament and it was a disappointing
[Guest]: moment, but it was a really instructive moment on how political economy works. It was very
[Guest]: humbling that, okay, maybe it will happen later. It is, I think it is an important reform
[Guest]: to pursue, but it did not get pursued. I did some work on infrastructure a little bit,
[Guest]: but most of my work was on financial sector reform and regulation and financial reform
[Guest]: and on public finance. So, my subject matter expertise, such as it is in these areas, but
[Guest]: there I have a lot of meta kind of insights on how to work with government and what I
[Guest]: did, what worked and what didn't work, which I just talked about mostly. I didn't get into
[Guest]: the subject matter as much. But yeah, I mean, government is a completely different creature
[Guest]: from companies and it will always be, it is a permanent fact, always very different from,
[Guest]: you can bring a little bit of so-called private sector experience into it, have a little more
[Guest]: alignment of incentives and all of that, but not a whole lot can be done on that front.
[Amit Varma]: So, you mentioned James Q. Wilson and we were talking about virtue earlier and one book
[Amit Varma]: I remember reading of Wilson was a book called The Moral Sense and I read this around the
[Amit Varma]: same time as A Moral Animal by Wright though I liked Wright's book more because it seemed
[Amit Varma]: more right to me. Just kidding. And, you know, again about state capacity, I have an episode
[Amit Varma]: with Karthik Mulyitharan on this and I've discussed this so many times actually, completely,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, Fukuyama gave an interesting frame of looking at the state, which is a frame
[Amit Varma]: of scope and strength. And with the Indian state, it's the scope is too much, the strength
[Amit Varma]: is too little. We do too many things badly while we should do a few things really well,
[Amit Varma]: which kind of becomes a problem. So, it is simultaneously the case that the state is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in too many places, but it is also incredibly weak as you pointed out. So, here's
[Amit Varma]: a question. It strikes me that when you are in this policy field, your mindset has to
[Amit Varma]: be different in two fundamental ways from anything else you did before. One is that
[Amit Varma]: any change, if it happens, will be incremental, it will be a tiny thing. You know, you can
[Amit Varma]: aim for the moon, but things move really slowly and you'll just get incremental and you won't
[Amit Varma]: get big moon shots working out. That's number one. And even those incremental change at
[Amit Varma]: scale can make a huge difference to people, but in ways that cannot be traced back to
[Guest]: you or quantified sometimes. Yeah, that's a good part of it, that you never get any
[Amit Varma]: credit for it. Yeah. And the second, which also ties in with the credit thing, is that
[Amit Varma]: your rhythm of looking at what you are doing and why you're doing has to slow down a lot
[Amit Varma]: because you're really playing the long game, that you may work on something for three years
[Amit Varma]: and nothing may happen. And sometimes you'll work on something for 15-20 years and then
[Amit Varma]: change will happen. And, you know, and when it does, sometimes, you know, change can happen
[Amit Varma]: really fast and in dramatic ways. But by and large, you're playing the long game, there's
[Amit Varma]: no immediate gratification, there's no payoff. If you're working in a company, for example,
[Amit Varma]: and you implement something, that payoff is visible. In the next quarter, sales will go
[Amit Varma]: up or sales will go down, shit will happen, new branches will open, you see the payoff.
[Amit Varma]: Here you don't see a payoff, there is no credit, there is no causality that can be kind of
[Amit Varma]: given to you. Your validation doesn't come from measurable results, right? So at one
[Amit Varma]: level, you have to sort of be internally driven. Yet, I would imagine given human nature, that
[Amit Varma]: most people in any field are not internally driven. They are ticking boxes going through
[Amit Varma]: the motions within the set group that they are. And some people in every field will be
[Amit Varma]: internally driven and will be dynamic. Sometimes that is just because of incentives. Like if
[Amit Varma]: you're the if you're the founder of a startup, you're going to be way more driven than somebody
[Amit Varma]: three rungs down the ladder. And sometimes that's just the kind of person you are, that
[Amit Varma]: whatever you do, if you're doing something you love, you're driven by it, even if you're,
[Amit Varma]: you know, not too high up or there isn't gratification. So you know what this change in mindset, am
[Amit Varma]: I sort of characterizing it accurately is are there things you'd like to add to it?
[Amit Varma]: And what was the experience for you coming from, you know, a private world to the world
[Amit Varma]: of where you're working with government and change happens at a glacial pace, and there
[Amit Varma]: are all these obstacles, and, and so on and so forth?
[Guest]: Yeah, so two, three factual things is that one is that when it happens, the impact is
[Guest]: huge. And I wouldn't say that I'm completely indifferent to the impact that obviously we
[Guest]: do this because we want things to change and we want things to improve and subject to democratic
[Guest]: agreement and consensus building, all of that the best possible path that is possible. Sometimes
[Guest]: the second best, but at least when it happens, it's the impact is very large. And it's it
[Guest]: can be quite satisfying to see that impact that okay, you had a small contribution to
[Guest]: your society, even if nobody ever knows about it, you know, and it's, I mean, you're part
[Amit Varma]: of the society.
[Amit Varma]: Can you give examples of this from your own work?
[Guest]: No, I don't want to attribute anything to myself because everything I did was in teams.
[Amit Varma]: Can you give examples of this from your team's work?
[Guest]: Yeah, I can. I mean, again, the credit should go to politicians. 100% of it, 0% should come
[Guest]: to anybody else. But there's been a cleanup of capital controls regulation in India. There
[Guest]: has been, I mean, introduction of inflation targeting in India. There has been a push
[Guest]: for consumer protection regulation improvements in finance in India. There's been quite a
[Guest]: bit of expenditure management reform in the last several years, a few years since we worked.
[Guest]: I can't say anything specific, but the report is confidential. Raja Chailiah founded NIPFP,
[Guest]: you know, he was our founder. And he was a great tax economist, public finance specialist
[Guest]: and special expertise in tax. He worked for many years, you know, on rationalizing our
[Guest]: tax system. It was only in the late 90s that we actually got to this 30% tax rate that
[Guest]: we now have, right, under the third front government, the UDF government that we had.
[Guest]: So that's the other part of it that you have to work for many years. And then there'll
[Guest]: be a moment suddenly, when things fall in place, human beings have tried everything
[Guest]: else before doing the right thing, so to speak, you know, or finding a optimal kind of a solution
[Guest]: that works, at least for a particular kind of social welfare function. Social welfare
[Guest]: function also changes, right? People have different views about what should be the social
[Guest]: welfare function. And then you have a particular analysis, making, assuming a certain kind
[Guest]: of social function, and then suddenly these things align and it works. Hopefully, it's
[Guest]: a good, it's a good thing it will work because some of the reforms we did in 90s, the thinking
[Guest]: goes back to 70s also, right? There were committees set up in the late 70s, 80s, people like Mr.
[Guest]: Ahluwalia and all they were preparing proposals for reform.
[Amit Varma]: I had an episode with Montague where he talks about how from the late 70s.
[Guest]: Yeah, late 70s itself, I mean, the work started and then the payoff for the society not for
[Guest]: the person who worked on it, you're here to serve, happened many, many years later. I
[Guest]: mean, some of them may have passed away in the process. Raja Chalaiya worked on tax reform
[Guest]: for many years, you know, and things got better gradually. But the genuine kind of settlement
[Guest]: of the current relatively better tax regime that we have on the direct tax side came in
[Guest]: the late 90s. And I think that's the way it is that many of the things that we work on
[Guest]: will not never get implemented. Some that will get implemented may have a huge impact,
[Guest]: some will have a smaller impact, but generally you will have a significant kind of impact.
[Guest]: And then the timing may mismatch that you may have done something and it's there in
[Guest]: the file system. And then five years later, you are doing something else, but it gets
[Guest]: drafted. Even now I get calls from people I worked with, okay, why was this drafted?
[Guest]: We are now pushing it through to the system, putting up a cabinet or whatever. And then
[Guest]: we need a clarification of this because institutional memory is required to interpret why it was
[Guest]: done. Even now, like literally last week, so this is a part of that, the way the system
[Guest]: works. And again, it's a democratic system. And there are many people who can say no to
[Guest]: something and then can literally stop it from happening. And that's good because many mistakes
[Guest]: don't get made because people like me may recommend something very bad also and harmful
[Guest]: and then it doesn't get done. Thank God. If it hadn't been done, we would have been feeling
[Guest]: much more guilty. So I have faith that, okay, at least now, I mean, if I was living in fifties
[Guest]: and sixties and seventies, it would be very, very frustrating because hardly any good ideas
[Guest]: get accepted and bad ideas are taken up very easily. But now we're in a different kind
[Guest]: of a polity since the nineties at least. And at least the elite consensus was shifting.
[Guest]: And now I think the shelf life is, I mean, the life from thinking about working on some
[Guest]: analysis and bringing out something which may work and that being heard is, I mean,
[Guest]: a shorter period of time. And whether it gets done or not is something which cannot be controlled.
[Guest]: It's left to the democratic processes. And that's the way to think about it. And in fact,
[Guest]: I was at eight years, I never got paid for anything. It was the best time of my life
[Guest]: because a lot of things get got done because we were just enjoying the work, you know,
[Guest]: it is just so much and it was a good place, a good team, a good set of people to learn
[Guest]: from work with. Most of them were motivated intrinsically because they were enjoying that
[Guest]: work. And we had good leaders in the team who were so kind of, who kept us motivated
[Guest]: because they also were doing it for that reason. And I think that's what it is that, you know,
[Guest]: it's like, why does a soldier fight? He fights for his buddies in some senses. So similarly,
[Guest]: I mean, nation is there, but the immediate impulse comes from being a part of a particular
[Guest]: team. So, and going through that process, we are overestimating like some of the least
[Guest]: most dangerous professions pay very little, firemen and all, for example. But they are
[Guest]: very dangerous. You put your life on the line. Soldiers don't get much money, but they go
[Guest]: and put a line, overestimate the power of material incentives in human nature. I mean,
[Guest]: people find meaning in a variety of ways. And the question is whether you find meaning
[Guest]: or not. And it was meaningful. The work is very meaningful. Working with government and
[Guest]: policy reform in a lower middle income country is a very meaningful thing. And they'll never
[Guest]: have any shortage of meaning while you're doing that.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, earlier you had mentioned about how at various points in time, you've changed
[Amit Varma]: your mind about various things. So take me through some of this because my just as an
[Amit Varma]: outsider from outside, my thinking about government has also changed from painting broad brush
[Amit Varma]: strokes like how dysfunctional it is, to still thinking it is dysfunctional, but understanding
[Amit Varma]: the dysfunction much better understanding the incentives that work understanding the
[Amit Varma]: pressures that people inside go through and the ways in which they fight them, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so, you know, as someone who was an insider, you know, you began with a commission, but
[Amit Varma]: then you work much more closely with them, you even consulted for the Ministry of Finance
[Amit Varma]: for a while, though, obviously, your work there is confidential, so we won't talk about
[Amit Varma]: it. But, you know, what was your sense of the innards of government? And what are the
[Amit Varma]: ways in which you changed your mind, both about the state, and also about broad ideological
[Amit Varma]: ideas that you might have held, you know, before you actually got into the belly of
[Amit Varma]: the beast?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I partly answered this question in terms of what I said earlier about having
[Guest]: some empathy for people to work in a very difficult situation and with lots of constraints,
[Guest]: and understanding of those constraints before making any recommendations and, and expecting
[Guest]: things to change. And, and that's absolutely essential for anybody who's working on policy
[Guest]: to understand who you're working for or with, and who you're recommending to absolutely
[Guest]: essential, there is no substitute for that. In fact, if you, you know, there's a famous
[Guest]: quote that all happy families are alike and all unhappy families are different, unhappy
[Guest]: for different reasons. And it's quite true that if you're working in developed countries,
[Guest]: there is a certain commonality in which way the state works there. There are different
[Guest]: institutional design choices they've made, different varieties of capitalism, different
[Guest]: varieties of separation of power, or they have, but there is a certain, more or less
[Guest]: formality to it. And it works in a particular way, there's high capacity in most of those
[Guest]: states. And, but developing countries are all each one is different. I mean, there's
[Guest]: a different dynamic in terms of level capacity, how it's utilized, how whether it's democratic
[Guest]: or not most developing, many countries are not democratic. So that makes a difference.
[Guest]: Some of them have a permanent civil service, other ones have a much more mix and match
[Guest]: of permanent civil service with more of when hiring from outside. So there is a, when you
[Guest]: understand who you're working with, and Indian state is a particular kind of creature and
[Guest]: each within that each state has its own, there's a national level dynamic and there's a state
[Guest]: level dynamic, subnational, and different agencies, if you're working with Reserve Bank
[Guest]: of India, it's a particular kind of agency is very different from SEBI, for example.
[Guest]: And so you need to understand who you're working for and working with and try to add value
[Guest]: in that sense. And as I said that, it's very important to try to figure out the next step,
[Guest]: you know, like, how do you evolve to the next step, how to do little better than you're
[Guest]: doing earlier, because that, that's what growth is, you know, growth is about improving from
[Guest]: where you are, you know, and development is something grander, and you want to get there,
[Guest]: some kind of a state you want to get towards, and you that opinion about what that state
[Guest]: is may also change over time, but you may have some kind of a lodestar in your mind
[Guest]: and you work towards it. But growth is about getting from here to there, and then from
[Guest]: there to there, and you know, a step at a time. And, and that's what I think is a big
[Guest]: change that earlier I used to think much more in terms of best practices, I think much more
[Guest]: about abstract notions of what rights should be preserved, you know, what kind of things
[Guest]: should be pursued, but I now have much more of a sense of what is possible. And also about
[Guest]: what is possible now, you know, in the next, given the political economy, given the way
[Guest]: the institutions work, what would be an improvement over from where you are, like, somebody says,
[Guest]: well, how should we improve tax enforcement, I look at more closely at where can we make
[Guest]: some of the improvements now to the next step. And then I will not, there's a blueprint that
[Guest]: you can actually decide, okay, in 20 years where you should be, that next step will then
[Guest]: in a complex kind of way, I mean, there'll be interactions with other parts of the system
[Guest]: and stakeholders will then reveal the next binding constraints and you then you go further.
[Guest]: And I think that's the most important kind of realization I've had. The second is that
[Guest]: earlier I used to take the de jure as de facto. What I mean by that is, I used to assume that
[Guest]: whatever is written in the rule book and laws are, is what happens in reality and, but that's
[Guest]: a very, very wrong assumption. I mean, it's completely wrong, in fact, more wrong than
[Guest]: even I have fully fathomed till now, you know, I know intellectually, but I haven't fully
[Guest]: taken grip on this kind of realization that, in fact, in developing countries like India,
[Guest]: in most circumstances, laws are completely not descriptive of what actually goes on.
[Guest]: And the way the executive implements the laws is very different from what the laws have
[Guest]: written or intended. And the reality is shaped much more by decisions by politicians and
[Guest]: civil servants and the order in which that decisions are taken is much more important
[Guest]: than what's written in the text of the law. And the correspondence can be very, very weak
[Guest]: between these two. And sometimes even very counterintuitive in some senses that you've
[Guest]: written something in the rule book, but the reality is completely different from that.
[Guest]: You already see that sometimes when you talk about rights, do we have this right? I mean,
[Guest]: you've read a hundred, dozens of different rights into the constitution through jurisprudence,
[Guest]: but do you actually have that right when you go and when the reality is very different.
[Guest]: Similarly on the regulatory side also, similarly on the side of regulation of businesses, side
[Guest]: of different types of delivery of schemes and welfare programs, implementation of projects,
[Guest]: procurement, all of that, there is a lot more goes on in terms of informal decision making,
[Guest]: use of discretion, deal making, which may be actually developmental in its purpose and
[Guest]: may actually work towards improving things overall. But it's a hidden way in which the
[Guest]: state works. And unless you understand that, if you just work on policy in terms of just
[Guest]: saying change this law to that law and things will get better, unless you can first establish
[Guest]: that law actually is the real framework for governing reality in actuality and not just
[Guest]: a potentiality, then you are actually sparking up the wrong tree, you know, because what
[Guest]: matters then is basically how the people who are actually taking the decisions define their
[Guest]: worldview and what are the incentives that are shaping their behavior, what are the socialization
[Guest]: that they have gone through, those are things that become much more important.
[Guest]: And it's not about India only, whatever I have read about this kind of things, there
[Guest]: are other countries also in developing countries generally have this kind of a reality. And
[Guest]: there are hard reasons for it. And there are software reasons. The hard reason is the state
[Guest]: capacity constraint that we make many, many more laws than we can realistically implement.
[Guest]: Everything will come to a lock jam if we start implementing all the laws, especially on the
[Guest]: business side in the economy. And sometimes the laws are made at a time when now the current
[Guest]: executive is not so keen to implement them. And they do have some discretion, you know,
[Guest]: we may not like it, we want rule of law, this and that, but the political reality is that
[Guest]: the current executive has a lot of legitimacy to exercise some discretion over how laws
[Guest]: are to be implemented and all. And that was a big revelation when I started actually studying
[Guest]: this literature and also talking to lots of people in different sectors like infrastructure
[Guest]: and all about how they enter into a 30-year contract in a developing country which changes
[Guest]: so fast and so many realities change and risks they were holding could go bad.
[Guest]: How what were the assumptions and actually the assumptions were very informal, I mean
[Guest]: in the sense that they expected that the contract is one thing, but there will be concessions
[Guest]: made and some reliefs will be given if things go bad, you know. And I think that was realistic
[Guest]: because the contracts are by definition typically incomplete and much more incomplete in a developing
[Guest]: country context which is things are very disorganized, they change very rapidly. And it's just a
[Guest]: completely different world, you know, when you've gone through 10 years of 5% or 6% growth
[Guest]: or 7% growth, the country completely changed and you entered a contract for 30 years. So
[Guest]: there are hard realities because of which our discretion, some degree of informality
[Guest]: and implementation of rules and laws is required and then there are softer. Sometimes you actually
[Guest]: want to exercise discretion because you have the power and you want to do certain things
[Guest]: with that power and the law becomes a constraint for you and sometimes for good reasons, sometimes
[Guest]: bad reasons. So those are things which are on a case-by-case basis to decide. But these
[Guest]: were I think the main changes in my view. Basically the differences between having an
[Guest]: idealized conception in my mind, I mean even if it's a negative conception, it's still
[Guest]: an idealized and a stereotypical conception, from having a little better understanding
[Guest]: of how the state actually works and like something as simple as transparency and secrecy. Earlier
[Guest]: I had a very simplistic notion of transparency, more transparency, more transparency, move
[Guest]: is better for accountability, you know, cliches like sunshine is the best disinfectant, all
[Guest]: of those. But now I have kind of overcome that. I mean, in fact, a lot of my reading
[Guest]: these days is to try to philosophically understand it. So I read a lot more on decisionism, lot
[Guest]: more on utilitarianism, you know, what are the kind of frames in which this behavior
[Guest]: can be understood, not just justified and rational, but understood so that you can make
[Guest]: an informed opinion about what's going on, you know, not have some kind of an arbitrary
[Guest]: normative commitments, which this alienates you from a reality which may actually be what
[Guest]: it is for good reasons.
[Amit Varma]: I'll double click on a couple of things. But first, why did your views on transparency
[Amit Varma]: change?
[Guest]: Yeah, so if you look at our policies on transparency, they have changed over time, right? And it
[Guest]: is not like we had complete government transparency to begin with. In fact, the Right to Information
[Guest]: Act came out only in this century, after almost 55 years of independence or so, more than
[Guest]: 55 years of independence. And what I think is that transparency is a means to ends, you
[Guest]: know, it's not an end in itself, like I said, many things like rights and all their means
[Guest]: to other ends. And in many contexts, transparency works quite well, because it's important for
[Guest]: accountability, it's important to, for public debate to nudge the politicians and civil
[Guest]: servants in the right direction. And in some context, some specific context, it can be
[Guest]: a double edged sword and can even do harm to the ability of the decision maker to actually
[Guest]: do the right thing. For example, quite a few areas in which even in the developed countries
[Guest]: in which there's a lot of transparency, otherwise emphasis of transparency, they keep secrecy.
[Guest]: For example, for quite a few meetings that are held, the minutes are released after decades,
[Guest]: right? And so, you have to, that what does it show that you will take a decision on a
[Guest]: case by case basis and when the transparency is beneficial and when it is not. It is not
[Guest]: something that you can take as a slogan, is all I'm saying, that sunlight is always better than
[Guest]: darkness and democracy always dies in darkness. It's true, it's by and large true, but there are
[Guest]: exceptions to that. In the regulation making process, there are exceptions. In the executive
[Guest]: decision making space, not just in national security, but also in economic governance,
[Guest]: there are exceptions to that, in which you may need a little bit more discretion to exercise
[Guest]: and immediate public scrutiny may actually shut out the discussion, may disincentivize genuine
[Guest]: open discussion, difficult decisions to be taken and much more posturing. So, if you look at, for
[Guest]: example, some of the high courts in India started streaming their hearings and it's a double-edged
[Guest]: sword. I mean, there are some advantages to it, but I watched them and some of the judges are
[Guest]: literally posturing, they are trying to signal their, to quote the title of a book, quoting the
[Guest]: people in some ways, that they are trying to signal a certain kind of persona to them and
[Guest]: appear a certain way. So, I think it's a case by case basis, you have to decide in which situation
[Guest]: it will work and what situation it will not work. You means the people who have the legitimacy to
[Guest]: decide or I mean, basically in the elected and custodians of a democracy, within judges and the
[Guest]: elected representatives, they have to decide basically.
[Amit Varma]: So, let's turn our attention for a moment to, you know, a term that you've used at different parts
[Amit Varma]: of this conversation, which is utilitarianism. Now, my issue with utilitarianism or consequentialism
[Amit Varma]: is that there is a knowledge problem that you cannot possibly forecast the future or really
[Amit Varma]: be able to tell what happens and so on and so forth. And therefore, you can justify any decision
[Amit Varma]: by saying that these are the ends that we foresee. In fact, in a different context,
[Amit Varma]: you were talking about the jury de facto, and you pointed out that many people will
[Amit Varma]: come up with laws and things that solve the problem, and they will be mistaking intention
[Amit Varma]: for outcome, which is the most popular and lazy policy mistake that people will, you know,
[Amit Varma]: mistake intention for outcome and not care about the outcomes of something as long as the intentions
[Amit Varma]: are good. And my issue with utilitarianism is exactly that, that it can be used to justify
[Amit Varma]: really anything because you can forecast anything about the future, it depends on what your
[Amit Varma]: assumptions are. And therefore, it becomes a problematic frame. And therefore, I think that
[Amit Varma]: no matter I mean, obviously, when you're framing policy, you're framing policy, because you want
[Amit Varma]: it to end up in the right outcomes, and you are thinking of those. But at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: there should be a few principles, which are just normative, that they are the way they are. And we
[Amit Varma]: agree on some of those, for example, defending the right to life of citizens, the right to free
[Amit Varma]: speech, and so on and so forth, that these things should not be contextual, these things should not
[Amit Varma]: be case by case basis. So I understand the argument for, you know, transparency in certain
[Amit Varma]: cases being case by case. I'll take some time to kind of process those examples and read your work
[Amit Varma]: on it. But certain things I think should not be looked at in a utilitarian way, because that can
[Amit Varma]: lead you to terrible places like the great utilitarian philosopher Peter Singer had once
[Amit Varma]: argued that in certain situations, it's okay to kill an infant child, not a fetus, mind you,
[Amit Varma]: but an infant child, if well being of the world goes up under certain conditions, which I think
[Amit Varma]: is a barbaric way to think that there are certain things that should be considered sacred, we both
[Amit Varma]: agree the right to life is one of them. And I'd add other things, other negative rights, like
[Amit Varma]: free speech and property and so on and so forth. So what's your sense of, I mean, you know, using
[Guest]: utilitarian arguments? Yeah, I think, by default, the state is a utilitarian creature. Okay. So
[Guest]: for political reasons, more than anything else, that because you're trying to appeal to a large
[Guest]: number of people and trying to improve, or at least make the claim that you're improving their
[Guest]: happiness, the general pressure in a democracy, especially, and even in other regimes where
[Guest]: you need to get some degree of popular legitimacy, you know, like Communist Party in China is seeking
[Guest]: legitimacy through delivering certain things for the citizens. It's not just pure repression that
[Guest]: works for them. They're doing other things as well. But in democracy, for sure, there is a
[Guest]: general kind of pressure towards doing, serving a large number of people and their goals and
[Guest]: utilitarian frame actually takes you a long way in that direction. And when you think about
[Guest]: something like pure utilitarianism, it is what direct power fit, there is full of repugnant
[Guest]: conclusions, you know, especially when you think of population ethics and all, there are lots of
[Guest]: repugnant conclusions that are there. And you have to, you means, I mean, we as a collective
[Guest]: have to take a view on what would be the right approach. There is no one rule of thumb or a
[Guest]: formula, like even something like right to life. Obviously, we all agree right to life. But there
[Guest]: are situations in which I support the state taking a life, right? Like, there are situations of
[Guest]: conflict in which the state will rightfully take lives, not just of invaders and people who are
[Guest]: attacking us, but also when people who are fighting and taking up arms domestically,
[Guest]: there are criminals who are killed in encounters and that was the only option and that they are
[Guest]: authorized to kill somebody and the police are authorized to do that. Paramilitary are
[Guest]: authorized to do that, you know, there are violations of privacy that for utilitarian
[Guest]: purposes and actually for protecting life itself, because it's not just utilitarian ends,
[Guest]: but also there is life against life, right? One terrorist can kill another person. So,
[Guest]: you kill the terrorist before that terrorist comes and the situational awareness is required,
[Guest]: because obviously, it is better to arrest and bring to justice than all of that. But there
[Guest]: are situations in which they are authorized to do those things.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, those I imagine, like in this case, terrorists are about to shoot someone,
[Amit Varma]: so you shoot the terrorist is in the case where you are defending someone's right to life
[Amit Varma]: by doing that. So, you know, that calculation is not utilitarian.
[Guest]: I mean, the systems calculation for establishing this kind of a system of authorization of violence
[Guest]: and maintaining a certain kind of order is a utilitarian to basically preserve and enhance
[Guest]: the happiness for maximum number of people basically is the underlying logic. In a
[Guest]: particular situation that may actually require basically protecting one life by taking another
[Guest]: life. But that's not all that happens, right? There is a kind of a systematic repression that
[Guest]: is done for, for example, if you want to secede, for example. Secession is in that sense,
[Guest]: if you think about secession, I mean, it's a somebody just wants to leave the republic,
[Guest]: for example. But even then, if for the larger good of the republic or society,
[Guest]: citizens do authorize quite a bit of violence all over the world to be able to keep that
[Guest]: part of the body politic from leaving it. And it cannot be life against life. But there are
[Guest]: utilitarian gains for of having a republic of a particular kind, which may be lost if one part
[Guest]: leaves. So, political reasoning, generally, I think, supports a lot of utilitarian thinking.
[Guest]: And there are obviously, in our moral imaginations, in public imagination, some kind of a
[Guest]: deontological commitments that we make that thing, okay, there are these things that we think are
[Guest]: very worthy of preserving at the individual level, that we are not thinking only at the
[Guest]: collective that we need to preserve life as default and there's some dignity to it.
[Guest]: We have liberty we need to preserve and there is a degree of sanctity to that. And we have
[Guest]: put in place some systems to be able to do that and which systems can take a decision,
[Guest]: what is to be done, and the systems have to be approved over a period of time so that they do
[Guest]: these things well, you know, all I'm saying is that there is no general formula that can be
[Guest]: applied which will be universally valid. It depends on the state that the society is in.
[Guest]: There are situations in which you have to suspend certain rights. There are situations in which
[Guest]: you have to look the other way from these so called deeply held values, because the larger
[Guest]: good demands it. And that's where I think this these trade-offs are made and they're done,
[Guest]: they're made through these systems rather than because it requires certain kind of practical
[Guest]: judgment and situational awareness which is not available a prior. So, but suppose you say
[Guest]: there's a particular situation and what should you do? There should be a rule book about it.
[Guest]: If you were in a situation where every situation can be can be described and you have a rule book
[Guest]: that says okay this is what is to be done in that situation, then that's preferable because
[Guest]: every situation has been thought about, every scenario has been thought about and you've put
[Guest]: rules about it. But that's not possible always. So, discretion comes in. Discretion means some
[Guest]: somebody has to legitimize the use of that discretion and that's where I think we get
[Guest]: into the territory where these trade-offs have to be justified ex post rather than ex ante.
[Amit Varma]: Let's go back to what you said about you know the way government functions and the ways in which
[Amit Varma]: you changed your mind and one was the de jure de facto thing where you said that we sometimes
[Amit Varma]: pay too much importance, we sometimes take the existing laws as being reflective of the state
[Amit Varma]: of the world and they actually aren't and it seems to me to be a very profound point.
[Amit Varma]: So, can you dive in a little deeper into that with concrete examples so I can understand it a bit
[Guest]: better? So, one example obviously we've brought it up a couple of times in discussion and I always
[Guest]: try to bring it up whenever I can is to look at the constitutional you know protections that
[Guest]: we have been given. So, guaranteed first by writing them into the constitution and secondly
[Guest]: by reading them into the constitution through the judicial process and if you actually go to
[Guest]: seek relief and under many of them you may be surprised that I mean it's not so easy to get
[Guest]: relief. You know actually actual I mean de facto protections are not what is written and there are
[Guest]: political and governance reasons for those which we can discuss. The other is on the economic
[Guest]: regulation side. There's quite a bit of work done on economies that are governed by rules and
[Guest]: economies that are governed by deals where basically they compare the de jure expectation
[Guest]: of what would happen if the laws were implemented and de facto what actually happens and they say
[Guest]: there is no correspondence at all like we spend so much time worrying about ease of doing business
[Guest]: which is basically a measure of de jure requirements but same word bank when it did
[Guest]: surveys it found reality is very different. So, the construction permit de jure it's supposed
[Guest]: to take 150 days de facto it takes 30 days. People who actually do the construction say
[Guest]: I only got the I got the permits in 30 days. How? Because some shortcuts were found or some
[Guest]: pragmatic decisions were taken on the ground and by the frontline bureaucracy and they were they
[Guest]: had some incentives maybe there was some corruption maybe not who knows but they got it and it's not
[Guest]: just of India lots of the researchers who work on this and we show that this is a very common
[Guest]: phenomenon in developing worlds. As you go to developed world this this gap narrows between
[Guest]: de jure and de facto. There also there can be some gaps but the gap in developing country is
[Guest]: very significant. It's the law will say one thing and the reality will be very different. So,
[Guest]: these two examples are there and I mean they can think about any aspect of state action like one
[Guest]: of the things about security we are talking about utilitarianism and rights and are we sure that
[Guest]: the security agencies use their discretion when they should be using it. It's always a mystery
[Guest]: because lots of people in the in the ground will say no no no this was excessively used. It's
[Guest]: really difficult for us to find out as citizens who are living very far from where this kind of
[Guest]: conflict is going on and that becomes a question of who do you go to benefit of doubt to and then
[Guest]: of course it usually goes in one direction. So, there is the reality is very different from what
[Guest]: the rule book says in many parts of the world mostly in developing countries and across the
[Guest]: world in many many areas whether it's rights, whether it's regulations, whether it's use of
[Guest]: power by the state for security purposes, intelligence and so on. So, I think there
[Guest]: is kind of a commonality in literatures across different domains which reveals something very
[Guest]: deep deep about the nature of developing countries and much more of a kind of a
[Guest]: decisionist orientation that exists without we actually acknowledging it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in fact in our episode together I brought up Hayek and the distinction he makes between
[Amit Varma]: law and legislation and the way he defines a law over there is just a way of doing things
[Amit Varma]: a convention that has evolved over time from practice. For example, there may be a particular
[Amit Varma]: road which is built in a particular way where people just drive at 80 where it's completely
[Guest]: okay to drive at 80 and that's what people do. The new social economics scholars they define
[Guest]: institutions as rules of the game and what are the rules of the game? The one that actually exists
[Amit Varma]: not what's written in some rule book. Exactly, so let me finish that's what for the sake of the
[Amit Varma]: listeners. So, yeah and the way he defines legislation is what we would typically call laws
[Amit Varma]: which are the quote-unquote laws made by the government where on the same road they'll put
[Amit Varma]: a speed limit of 50 and the speed limit could just be ridiculous and no one actually follows it.
[Amit Varma]: So, that's again a de jure de facto sort of distinction right there.
[Guest]: Yeah, so it's the one that people actually follow and in fact rules are many many more than written
[Guest]: in the books. So, one thing is that what rules are written may not be followed and some different
[Guest]: rules. Plus there are other rules that the community itself has evolved like people who
[Guest]: are practicing I mean driving in a particular road may have evolved some kind of a practice
[Guest]: evolved certain kind of rules which are unwritten not written and neither have any correspondence
[Guest]: with what's written in the rule book and that's what matters. If you want to change reality you
[Guest]: have to first deal with reality and then say okay where do we move further because if you're playing
[Guest]: the whole de jure was a de jure game you're nothing to do with what actually goes on in
[Guest]: many parts of the country actually not just in economy in various in security in urban planning
[Guest]: and like if you look at in Delhi so much illegal construction happens right and what does get that
[Guest]: got to do with the rules. Rules are saying very different things but the reality is I had to deal
[Guest]: with the situation a couple a year ago and then it was a learning moment for me you know that
[Amit Varma]: how things happen. Yeah and also there's a third layer like one layer is of course what the state
[Amit Varma]: wants the rules to be another layer is what society has decided the rules are because society
[Amit Varma]: knows how it can function and often it functions despite the state and a third layer is when the
[Amit Varma]: state sets really oppressive rules and nothing would be possible but then another third set of
[Amit Varma]: rules evolves under which people can find a way to do jugar and you know get past whatever the
[Amit Varma]: state rules might be which is why you know in a place like India often you know one you're happy
[Amit Varma]: that there is the state capacity is so weak in some areas because it would perhaps be more oppressive
[Amit Varma]: if state capacity was adequate to carry out some of his rules and two bribery can sometimes act as
[Amit Varma]: as grease reducing friction and letting things actually happen you know and perhaps even in
[Amit Varma]: that ease of business example which you pointed out where a permit that may take 150 days actually
[Amit Varma]: takes 30 days and and we benefit society benefits if it takes 30 days. Sometimes it benefits sometimes
[Guest]: it harms because it's not something that everybody can get access to and it's not in and it increases
[Guest]: transaction costs significantly of doing it better to have more reasonable rules than to have this
[Guest]: kind of deal making going on all the time and even if it's a deal making it has to be more ordered
[Guest]: right so that more more people can move in so more people can access it but a lot of it is so yes the
[Guest]: state is low capacity sometimes it's a good thing but often it's a bad thing also because see one
[Guest]: thing is there that state's rules are there to be implemented and people can manipulate that fact
[Guest]: so those rules don't shape the reality for the most part but in some ways it they do
[Guest]: so when someone wants to invoke a rule you know they can go and get it invoked by paying a bribe
[Guest]: or something by you know going after someone under some obscure rule written somewhere
[Guest]: so I so there is a problem that exists simply because of the rule there that is there in the
[Guest]: rule book. Second is that in a way the existence of those rules threatens to crowd out the rule
[Guest]: making that is possible voluntarily by collective action you know so what happens practically is
[Guest]: that communities do evolve their own rules but they're always a threat hanging right that someday
[Guest]: the state will say no no you can't follow these rules we'll come and so the scary part of the
[Guest]: state is still there strength is not there the scare is still there which is at the back of the
[Guest]: mind for everybody so which in which prevents long-term investments and all done by communities
[Guest]: so I'll give you an example that I myself experienced okay I refer to it briefly that
[Guest]: about a year or so ago I live in a South Delhi locality which was constructed by the Delhi
[Guest]: Development Authority it's governed by the municipality here and the I was in the second
[Guest]: floor and the third floor is the top floor the person on the third floor top floor started
[Guest]: took control of the rooftop which is common property which is actually common property
[Guest]: for all the flats took control and started building a new flat there without anybody's
[Guest]: permission it's illegal she can't do it anyway and then obviously all the neighbors got worked
[Guest]: up and we called a meeting and we got together and we said you can't do this stop it she stopped it
[Guest]: then we actually a week or 10 passed 10 days passed and then their construction started again
[Guest]: then I went and asked the neighbors what's going on and all of them had backed off they had said
[Guest]: they had basically been threatened by her that if you go after me then I'll go after you how
[Guest]: will they should go after them because they had made minor modifications to their flats
[Guest]: like the you have balcony you got they got covered it which is illegal in the rules you know so by
[Guest]: making small I mean I have modifications illegal you have basically destroyed collective action
[Guest]: what was happening earlier that this is one major violator who's taken control of a large
[Guest]: collective common property and privatized it basically which is not a socially beneficial
[Guest]: thing because we all we all could enjoy it earlier and we were all together in fighting that
[Guest]: that major kind of violation of the law and also the moral norms of society but by criminalizing
[Guest]: or illegalizing something very small the state makes everybody criminal potentially criminal
[Guest]: right because everybody is implicated in some way or the other the laws are such that somebody wants
[Guest]: to go after you they'll find something to say that this guy has violated this this law like
[Guest]: he wears black t-shirt they'll find some obscure obscure law which says black t-shirts in the
[Guest]: evenings in Delhi are banned and this is a direct attack on me yeah it was intended to be so so this
[Guest]: is the dynamic which we should be mindful of that is it it happens in many domains that yes we say
[Guest]: the law is saying one thing reality is different and maybe sometimes it's better but the law being
[Guest]: bad actually is a problem the capacity being not used properly for solving the kind of problems
[Guest]: for example in this case solving it against most blatant violation of property rights taking
[Guest]: control of our own property is a problem and we should ideally the state should basically do what
[Guest]: it is meant to do which is solve big problems you know certain big problems and let other people do
[Guest]: you know the community can solve many problems markets and solve many problems because the
[Guest]: states want to micromanage our lives urban planning in India is all level of micro management right
[Guest]: what you can construct which direction you should have windows this and that everything is
[Guest]: regulated under the bylaws and the big violators just get away because everybody is completely
[Guest]: implicated so nobody comes together to fight against the small percentage to do real harm
[Guest]: and therefore we are not able to get collective action to the extent that we could I mean we still
[Guest]: try I mean we have fairly active when communities and all but we could be doing much better if the
[Guest]: state said that okay this will I leave to you I have experience I've seen when the state actually
[Guest]: leaves it how things happen I've seen my own I've studied these examples done field visits to see
[Guest]: how it happens you know and can give you examples of how this happens go ahead give so I mean
[Guest]: the first example many years ago I was doing an internship with government of Gujarat
[Guest]: this is I think 2005 or something and where basically my job was to study the implementation
[Guest]: of certain government orders and what are the government orders the government orders was
[Guest]: very short one-page order which was handing over the minor canal to the community to manage
[Guest]: so you know how irrigation system there's a major canal and then there are the minor
[Guest]: canals branch off and feed the villages so they said that minor canal will now be given over to
[Guest]: the community to manage maintain and decide how to release the water and who gets the water when
[Guest]: so I and they were wanting to study how it's being implemented if there are any impediments
[Guest]: and inefficiencies and all and so if any minor repair is there then the community was supposed
[Guest]: to get it done if any major repair is there and then you call the junior engineer get it done
[Guest]: but all the rules of basically distribution of water locally monitoring of those rules
[Guest]: implementation of the rules were to be left to the community so I went to 12 villages
[Guest]: in a in that period and in each of the village what I found is that at the tail of the canal
[Guest]: and at the head of the canal the same amount of water was being given released you know
[Guest]: which means a fair arrangement was there you know equitable arrangement and the community
[Guest]: evolved the rules and actually implemented the rules and because literally the farmer at the
[Guest]: tail end of the canal was happy and they said yes I'm getting and much better than I was to
[Guest]: get earlier because earlier there was to be excessive extraction you know I had used Alinor
[Guest]: Ostrom's framework to understand that that governance of the commons and if you leave it
[Guest]: like this should be taken at the level at which it is you know efficient to take it at and no
[Guest]: higher level basically you know subsidiarity is a principle and you should and that is a
[Guest]: completely missing it's so much of this we blame it on democracy maybe it's rightly blamed
[Guest]: but I doubt that many of these things are just vestiges you know which can be even with a little
[Guest]: bit of I mean forethought can be cleaned up and government of Gujarat did that right it was
[Guest]: basically they said you handle and they did it communities and this is the same thing
[Guest]: joint forest management has been done in south some of the places tanks water tanks are maintained
[Guest]: by communities and in whenever it's a nicely designed thing where the government doesn't
[Guest]: micromanage doesn't put its own people on committees and all of that community is formed
[Guest]: rules are made monitored everything is done by community there is some leader who rises to
[Guest]: provide a little bit of public good of you know getting this started it works and it almost always
[Guest]: was better than this what the state would do so I mean there are so many examples that I can give
[Guest]: just from our own democracy where local liberties when given I mean literally have to give it
[Guest]: because unfortunately we don't have have them naturally because the state is just becoming
[Guest]: boiler of collective action in many ways and if you do it then they deliver they do because it's
[Guest]: in their interest and they have long-term it's a repeated game so short-termism doesn't happen
[Guest]: they're settled communities they have long-term interests and long-term equities with each other
[Guest]: I would even bet that even in some urban areas because there's mobility you know even then it
[Guest]: can work under certain conditions on many many problems so and there I think it's obscene I mean
[Guest]: this we have these debates about rights and utilitarianism and all of that you know these
[Guest]: are grand frames in which we try to put realities and make sense of it have interesting intellectual
[Guest]: debates about where the trade-offs and all of that but the trade-offs and decisions are much
[Guest]: more intensely taken by people who are in a particular situation who have a good sense of
[Guest]: the common good and they they are able to come to an agreement especially if they take decisions
[Guest]: based on consensus rarely will you actually need to go beyond consensus because only when the kind
[Guest]: of transaction cost is very high and there is somebody who's just kind of making it very
[Guest]: difficult then you have to go voting and all of that but otherwise it works and I think that's
[Guest]: one community-based solution and markets a lot of this can be achieved through markets market can
[Guest]: solve any problem and then there are things that government should do and that and those it should
[Guest]: do and it should do them well and and there I think this is just an opinion right I mean ultimately
[Guest]: these have to work through the democratic system in some states we have seen a little more action
[Guest]: on this front but not much I mean we still have a very strange idea of what the state should do
[Guest]: very strange and every day we add up new laws new demands in the state we want the state to regulate
[Guest]: this and that it's a very strange kind of a phenomenon that reality doesn't change but we
[Guest]: keep piling on more and more of expectations from the state you know yeah in fact this takes me back
[Amit Varma]: to the Fukuyama's frame of the scope and the strength of the state like as we discussed earlier
[Amit Varma]: you know we should have a strong state that does very little but instead we have a weak state that
[Amit Varma]: does a lot and the thing is wherever the state does something that should not be in its scope
[Amit Varma]: but that week's state capacity can sometimes be a feature because otherwise it is you know
[Amit Varma]: too overbearing and nothing can done but at the same time it is the flip side of it is that even
[Amit Varma]: if the state doesn't have the strength the fear of the state still is there and as a bad and and
[Amit Varma]: the bad laws plays in play into that and so what what happened to your fourth floor issue I mean
[Amit Varma]: that's a great title for a novel on the fourth floor but eventually how did that get solved
[Guest]: so in that situation because collective action failed I tried at a personal level to some extent
[Guest]: and I eventually got a order from the deputy commissioner to basically take enforcement
[Guest]: action against that violation of the law and also of morals but it's been now more than a year and
[Guest]: it hasn't been implemented yet is he building it it's built they're living in it oh so no one's
[Guest]: going to demolish it yeah I really doubt it this is the game right this is the game that you take
[Guest]: so you take charge of a common property you build out a nice looking flat which be immediate payoff
[Guest]: is maybe 40 50 lakh rupees and then you pay off 10 lakh or 8 lakh to the municipality which is
[Guest]: what it is and the rest of it is yours and you basically threaten others on very small minor
[Guest]: money like somebody covered their balcony they don't lose that right for them the payoff of the
[Guest]: payoff of the balcony is higher than the loss of utility from access to the rooftop but the
[Guest]: stupidity is the illegality of doing their minor modification right which the state has done so but
[Guest]: that is the game that is and that's a great opportunity for rent seeking for the state
[Amit Varma]: and are you stuck there is it a rented flat or do you own your flat I had to leave that house
[Guest]: because they were bullies and they made it very difficult to stay there well sad story that tells
[Amit Varma]: us a lot about both our society and the lack of state capacity so just going back to that
[Amit Varma]: original thing we were talking about I think seven or eight hours ago about it hasn't been that long
[Amit Varma]: maybe it feels that long feels that long just before you mentioned did you read a fact day
[Amit Varma]: you also mentioned the really important point of when you are proposing a solution or proposing a
[Amit Varma]: policy you need to be clear about what the next step is just be clear about what is the process
[Amit Varma]: what is the next step can you illustrate that for me with an example yeah so I mean there are
[Guest]: many examples in fact this is a theme of my work for last few years and thinking about it so just
[Guest]: a few examples where I have participated in some way or the other small way is one is for example
[Guest]: when government proposed under basically pressure from supreme court that India should have a data
[Guest]: protection law and a data protection regulator and there was a lot of noise to have a very
[Guest]: all-encompassing data protection law and a very powerful data protection authority and
[Guest]: about five years ago something I wrote about it a long essay why that doesn't make actually
[Guest]: sense we should start with something more modest you know start with this narrow scope again I
[Guest]: quoted Fukuyama's book in that essay as well the one state building book that you're referring to
[Guest]: and I suggested what would be the first step to get things started so that for next decade or so
[Guest]: we have some improvement on data protection regulation a little bit and modest state
[Guest]: capacity expectation modest scope of the work and then if that works it may fail it may not work at
[Guest]: all you know it may not get any benefit at least you would take a smaller risk right instead of
[Guest]: giving an all-powerful authority a huge amount of power and loading it with so much expectation
[Guest]: so that was something that I had written about later some of my colleagues also wrote about it
[Guest]: and hopefully that will that's what will happen because the bill has been withdrawn government I
[Guest]: think now is thinking more in pragmatic terms about what can be done in data protection rather
[Guest]: than trying to just try to build a copy of first word frame which is very compliance heavy
[Guest]: overarching regulatory kind of a overkill I would say so that that was one example where I think
[Guest]: there is a different way to think about the next step and then we may get somewhere eventually you
[Guest]: know we don't know right now similarly there is a question about for example what is to be done
[Guest]: with public sector banks I maintained whenever I've written about it is that privatization will
[Guest]: not work why because they are very fragile institutions the only reason they are not
[Guest]: having a run on the banks is because there is a government implicit government guarantee
[Guest]: so you can do privatization either by selling it to another large private bank but I don't know
[Guest]: how many private banks in India have appetite to buy some of the larger public sector banks
[Guest]: because it's very they're too large for them right like there are only couple of very large
[Guest]: private sector banks in India and they are the largest bank is a public sector bank and then
[Guest]: there are a couple of private sector banks and equally big public sector banks so it's not easy
[Guest]: to you know just absorb another public sector bank and take a run so privatization is a sensible
[Guest]: decision and I think in the long run but what are the next steps to get there right you need to
[Guest]: create an order in which you privatization will hold so I said resolution for example if you have
[Guest]: a effective and working resolution failure resolution mechanism for banks and all financial
[Guest]: firms then it creates trust that even if the bank is fragile and is failing my money will be safe
[Guest]: and that's the way in which quite some other countries have been able to do that get that
[Guest]: thing corrected right and then you can give lots of bank licenses and lots of you can prioritize
[Guest]: public sector banks also one key kind of binding constraint right now in our system for giving
[Guest]: many more bank licenses and also killing two birds with the same stone is also for
[Guest]: privatization of public sector banks is effective and working resolution mechanism for financial
[Guest]: firms so otherwise I mean if you do ideologically privatize you can say but it won't work you know
[Guest]: like it will create potentially create instability in the financial system if you have suppose
[Guest]: runs on some of these banks and it will not even happen in the first place so you need conditions
[Guest]: to to get to get there so similarly on government procurement there's a lot of complaint about
[Guest]: how government procures poorly contracts poorly and makes a lot of mistakes in just going by L1
[Guest]: and all that there have been some action on it recently but one of the core issues is not so
[Guest]: much the contract design but what happens before the contract design is done so how do you create
[Guest]: conditions in which pre-contractual preparatory work is done in a more thoroughly we spent very
[Guest]: little in pre-contractual processes than most comparable countries so we are penny wise pound
[Guest]: foolish in that sense that because some of the pre-contractual work often doesn't lead to our
[Guest]: actual contract procurement so then who is going to answer to the three C's where does this money
[Guest]: go so because of that perhaps they don't do it but if you do it to get that right that indirectly
[Guest]: you will get potentially better procurement practices so I mean there is a question there
[Guest]: are different intuitive way of thinking about it one is what is the next step then there's
[Guest]: obliquity that you do one thing and something else gets solved in the process right obliquity
[Guest]: you must have read about that I actually haven't tell me yeah it's a frame of solving a problem
[Guest]: that you where you you want to solve something but you will do something else and then indirectly
[Guest]: that problem will get solved or example always start a virtuous cycle towards solving that
[Guest]: problem I mean these examples that I gave you basically like bank privatization you see
[Guest]: prime FSI resolution privatization I mean there is a I mean it's not obvious what the links are
[Guest]: but if you get that right it creates political economy I mean incentives to then go in the
[Guest]: direction of privatization give a direction of doing more bank licensing and all of that
[Guest]: it creates conditions for that you know so I mean you can think about it that way as well I mean if
[Guest]: it helps but at least it's the next step that could ease some of the binding constraints then
[Guest]: you go further and like example when the proposal to give corporates banking license was given
[Guest]: I mean most people around me we had supposed it but I thought key under the current constraints
[Guest]: that we have and the way our banking is going where private sector banks are the only ones
[Guest]: that have grown in the last few years foreign banks have not been growing their credit I mean
[Guest]: adjusted for inflation and public sector banks have also not grown their credit because of
[Guest]: inflation by much it's very marginal only where we need to get more give more banking licenses
[Guest]: and right now it seems that it is not an ideal solution I agree with people who criticize it
[Guest]: but can it be seen as a next step and then you go towards a better solution for it's a second
[Guest]: often in life second best third best solutions are what you need to you need to be able to you
[Guest]: know accept and then move towards better I mean from there you know similarly if you want to have
[Guest]: less political intervention in banking I mean I don't like it but it is better to have some
[Guest]: development banks set up separately to do that with them and let these banks be more commercial
[Guest]: banks there are lots of such kind of ideas toward discussing and debating you know as next steps and
[Guest]: I mean I don't know whether what the right next step is I mean in some domains I have some ideas
[Guest]: and some specific I've worked on those areas but one doesn't really I mean it's but I think it's
[Guest]: a frame of thinking of thinking about what the binding constraint is easing that first and then
[Guest]: gradually kind of moving towards a better kind of a setup and also thinking in more oblique ways that
[Guest]: that's the goal but let's just keep that aside and say where can we go now so that the goal
[Amit Varma]: becomes easier to achieve later all this is very illuminating let's move back to your personal
[Amit Varma]: journey that after you know 2011 you join an IPFP in 2019 you join Carnegie so what sort of prompted
[Amit Varma]: this move because on the one hand you're in sort of the belly of the beast you are you know working
[Amit Varma]: on policy you manage to get stuff done it's given you great satisfaction a little yeah a little
[Guest]: satisfaction no I got a little done got a lot of satisfaction even better you got a little done and
[Amit Varma]: got great satisfaction so which is which seems like incredibly satisfying at so many levels
[Amit Varma]: but you decided to move on to Carnegie and enter the think tank world so what prompted this decision
[Amit Varma]: and tell me a little bit about the think tank world in general in the sense key what role does
[Amit Varma]: it play in in practice what role does it play in practice because what one can say about a lot of
[Amit Varma]: think tanks is key key up Nicole reposition paper a career worker but you're not really making a
[Amit Varma]: dent you know so how is it so tell me a little bit about the think tank ecosystem in general
[Amit Varma]: and then in particular why you chose to make this move and why you thought you know that
[Guest]: you can make a difference here what excited you about it I don't know why it would be interesting
[Guest]: for your audience to hear why I did it but but yeah I mean I'll just I'll tell you because you
[Guest]: asked but basically I had been doing this policy analysis work for eight years and that was an
[Guest]: IPFE it's good in many ways but I wanted to do more of political economy research and more thinking
[Guest]: on institutions basically and political economy that shapes institutions in the real sense you
[Guest]: know the de facto sense and the work policy research is interesting and exciting but it's
[Guest]: just I mean after a point it became a little repetitive for me and and also when I left at
[Guest]: that time there was no grand project at that time like nothing like it take one or two years to work
[Guest]: on something and you know and at that time just recently this bill that I was working on had
[Guest]: withdrawn from the parliament so I mean I that was a bit of a setback so I wanted to and it was
[Guest]: an experience also right because going through that process I thought that you know it is kind
[Guest]: of naive to think that a law like this just will just go through they will be pushed back especially
[Guest]: when public sector banks and for and also from some ideologues very significant pushback was there so
[Guest]: I should understand this a little bit you know because I do policy analysis I do policy research
[Guest]: and I'm okay I'm not be great at it but okay at it I need to understand the larger system in which
[Guest]: this stuff works political economy institutions shape policies and and implementation of those
[Guest]: policies most importantly and the way they get implemented all of that so I wanted to get more
[Guest]: into research more into thinking and writing about these issues and Carnegie came along at the right
[Guest]: time for that you know and me and a colleague of mine both of us moved together and so we started
[Guest]: a small kind of a research program political economy research and we thought because this
[Guest]: is a more pure play think tank you know they don't expect you to work with government or have
[Guest]: projects with government and all if it happens it's fine I mean they don't they're not adverse
[Guest]: to it we do things with government as well but it's not something which happens on a regular
[Guest]: basis it's not something that is considered to be necessary also you need to keep some distance
[Guest]: you keep you do your research put it out it's a small institution it's not a very large think tank
[Guest]: it's probably the smallest think tank here and so there's a little bit more freedom to do research
[Guest]: and thinking and writing on these issues in a more broader sense so I wanted to broaden my horizons
[Guest]: is is the main reason I actually got into this world and I think that I've got here I mean
[Guest]: it's a pretty good place which gives you an opportunity to think broadly and identify issues
[Guest]: work on them take some time to work on them put out short pieces work towards long pieces you know
[Guest]: and and that's what the think tank is supposed to do that so what is the think tank think tank is
[Guest]: not a university but it's also not a consulting firm right so I think normatively I think the
[Guest]: best role a think tank in play is to bring the best of academic learning to have a bearing on
[Guest]: political and policy decisions you know that's my least framing of that's what I try to do my work
[Guest]: try to get the best academic thinking plus I would say situational awareness awareness of
[Guest]: what's going on in India in the state in the domains in which you're working so for that
[Guest]: so there are two ways in which mainly I learned I learned by doing data analysis and research
[Guest]: review of reading of other people's research bringing that consequences of that into my
[Guest]: thinking and by talking to and meeting people in political economy whether it's government
[Guest]: outside private sector all of those and so trying to get a awareness of what's happening and put
[Guest]: that in a broader frame of I mean comparative political economy economics research on economics
[Guest]: from on political economy of growth and all and so how do we make sense of what's happening right
[Guest]: now in India in a conceptual way you know and then therefore what does that mean for what is to be
[Guest]: done you know so so that's something you can do in a think tank which is harder to do in a university
[Guest]: because their focus is much more on teaching and also more fundamental research journal
[Guest]: oriented research you need to get that journal publication otherwise you will not survive in
[Guest]: that system for long and it's harder to do that in the consulting firm business also because you're
[Guest]: trying to solve I mean day-to-day problems with government it's much more I mean much more
[Guest]: pressure to just do things so there's a unique place that think tanks have and at their best
[Guest]: they can do this much more so yeah I don't think the exam should react to day-to-day events we
[Guest]: shouldn't I mean but but we have to I mean that's just the way it goes I wish think tanks did fewer
[Guest]: events but we have to because that's also our duty to do events and whole workshops and seminars and
[Guest]: all of that conferences and all of that but we do that but the core of it is still research and
[Guest]: one should try to do it and much more than original research on some one one kind of narrow
[Guest]: topic is to make it make different types of research that is happening by others bring
[Guest]: together review it consider what the implications of policy political economy institutions are
[Guest]: and inform thinking on these issues you know and I think there is a value to be had for
[Guest]: this kind of work I think and now it's like Carnegie is the world's oldest think tank 1910
[Guest]: so this institution form has existed for now almost 112 years and now of course there are
[Guest]: many many think tanks and they're trying to do this thing in variety of ways some of them have
[Guest]: different self-definitions there's no one ideal type I have my own ideal type of what the best
[Guest]: of think tank should try to do I mean whether we live up to those is a different kind of
[Guest]: question but but there is a value there's certainly a value in doing something like that
[Amit Varma]: in fact that's why I mean so in 1910 when Carnegie was started as as a think tank and
[Amit Varma]: and the the ecosystem of discourse was completely different the nature of discourse was completely
[Amit Varma]: different media was completely different it was you know almost seems like a prehistoric world
[Guest]: so much has changed yeah it was before world war one it was Carnegie and all for international
[Amit Varma]: peace four years later there was a it was a war so yeah so well done you had one job
[Amit Varma]: but so just but now everything has changed right the nature of discourse has changed
[Amit Varma]: there are you know in that vibrant bazaar of ideas there are many more voices from many more places
[Amit Varma]: often with far greater reach with many different different imperatives coming from places
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth so you know what do you think about the ways in which discourse has
[Amit Varma]: changed like we have discussed in the past very often offline about how incredibly polarized it
[Amit Varma]: has become online how tribalized it has become online where reasonable dialogue like you and
[Amit Varma]: I can have where you respect the other person and you can disagree in a civil way you can
[Amit Varma]: enter an argument in good faith you can assume goodwill from the other person that seems
[Amit Varma]: completely absent from the public space and a lot of the agenda for other sort of debate
[Amit Varma]: also seems to be vitiated by what is happening especially on twitter where there is this angry
[Amit Varma]: tone of condemnation which will just spread everywhere so what do you just think about
[Amit Varma]: this ecosystem of discourse what it does for the environment and does that in any way change the
[Amit Varma]: role that either think tanks like Carnegie have or that public intellectuals can play whether or
[Amit Varma]: not you consider yourself one you know in some small way you are right you guys have a newsletter
[Guest]: you and Anirudha writing I don't think of myself as a public intellectual because I mean it is a
[Guest]: certain kind of ideal type I'm not in that I'm much more of a yeah but it's not something you
[Amit Varma]: get to choose if you're someone who is in part of public discourse you know that's a role that
[Amit Varma]: you know just gets thrust upon you in a sense it's no longer a decision you can make when you're
[Amit Varma]: airing your opinions and your insights at on a regular level in the public so leave that label
[Amit Varma]: aside of public intellectual but what is so one what do you think about this changed ecosystem of
[Amit Varma]: discourse and the way things are and because in a different kind of ecosystem you know a think tank
[Amit Varma]: or a public intellectual or anyone who is trying to make a difference could have perhaps had a
[Amit Varma]: greater chance of making a difference because there's less cacophony the imperatives are
[Amit Varma]: different there is less posturing in the public space but today with the tribalism the polarization
[Amit Varma]: everything how has this course changed and what are the new challenges that then emerge for a
[Amit Varma]: think tank like Carnegie and for you you know a private person sitting quietly in the middle of
[Amit Varma]: all of this thinking about matters with depth and nuance having experienced the whole process of
[Amit Varma]: being part of the state and trying to change things what do you then see your role as in all
[Amit Varma]: of this because i can bet that in some way beyond your personal duties and whatever in some way there
[Amit Varma]: is some kind of dharma you defined for yourself within this role that you're playing so i described
[Guest]: the role for think tank that's i think the role for i mean as individual researchers also in
[Guest]: think tanks right to bring the best of academic thinking research in conversation with facts about
[Guest]: the economy and society and polity right now to suggest in some modest ways you know how we can
[Guest]: think about the future that's the research dharma we also have platforms in which we bring in
[Guest]: different voices we usually ensure diversity of opinions in those forums every single seminar
[Guest]: that at least we have held where there's more than one speaker there's diversity of viewpoints
[Guest]: there are people from across different views on that on that issue so that's something that we do
[Guest]: that we do we do quite a bit of public writing it's not just trying to inform policymakers also
[Guest]: i mean other peers political economy researchers and all to i mean to say that okay we are in
[Guest]: conversation with you we are learning from you and we are also trying to feed back into that
[Guest]: and then that system and so that we will continue to do i see that the social media
[Guest]: and this kind of explosion of media as such we're much more connected much more virtually
[Guest]: intertwined than we were ever earlier is kind of a i mean it's what you make of it right like
[Guest]: i mean you have to harness these things towards the purpose that you see i mean i agree that if
[Guest]: you get into the game then i'm not heideggerian but you know heideggerian enough to worry that
[Guest]: you know that then it becomes it consumes you you know it being being instrumental becomes that
[Guest]: being a twitter user becomes your primary identity and everything else becomes assumed under that
[Guest]: so but but it's a choice right that you whether you get to that or not and how how does human
[Guest]: technology relation work to use don i hides framing we still have some choice at the level
[Guest]: of persons and families and institutions and organizations on how we define it for example i
[Guest]: am not active on social media at all in fact i i have a twitter account where i put out
[Guest]: whatever i write and then run away from there and no activity on facebook linkedin also nothing
[Guest]: that kind of stuff so and but i find it useful to put out stuff there it's just a way for me
[Guest]: to archive and some people i get it it's fine newsletter i find useful because it just gives
[Guest]: me a rhythm to write on a fortnightly basis and put something out and it gets to some people who
[Guest]: i whose opinion i care about and i want to engage with them and and that's something that i've
[Guest]: enjoyed doing but the core of it continues to be our activity of research right that
[Guest]: policy oriented research political economy research where we're trying to do what i just
[Guest]: said we're we're supposed to be doing and we're trying to do it hopefully do better of it in the
[Guest]: future and technologies have changed many times in human history but human nature remains that and
[Guest]: and in different eras people have under different technologies have still maintained you know their
[Guest]: commitment to whatever they were doing and others get got swayed by one that technology and change
[Guest]: their way of living according to technology and all but that's a that's still a choice i see that
[Guest]: as far as democracy is concerned it's a great thing that people have so much ways to express
[Guest]: themselves and express their opinions and give feedback and all of that as citizens we still
[Guest]: have a duty to be more careful when we give anybody feedback we i hope nobody withdraws
[Guest]: anybody what people do i hope when you critique somebody you have thought about it and thought
[Guest]: deeply about the issue those are virtues that you have to exercise because technology without some
[Guest]: virtues that work in the world of this kind of technology can do harm than good but it can also
[Guest]: do a lot of good so it's something which we need to decide on a at a level of individuals and
[Guest]: families and organizational communities about what do you want to make of this and think tanks also
[Guest]: have to do that so for example we have a youtube channel we have twitter accounts we have facebook
[Guest]: we have linkedin all of that and we harness it to for expressing our ideas and all of that but we
[Guest]: try to do as much i mean focus on what our work and these are just new ways for us to reach out
[Guest]: basically you know like till now at least i have never been asked about how many views are you
[Guest]: getting or how many uh retweets are you getting and all those are not things that really i think
[Guest]: fortunately my organization people care about i mean hopefully in the i mean they never care
[Guest]: about it but if they do in the future i'll have some difficulties but i mean and it's true of i
[Guest]: think technology across the board you know like how doctors use technology they can use it to do
[Guest]: good or it can they can do it you use it to do i mean to not do good in other domains as well think
[Guest]: tanks because we are in the world of ideas one good thing is that we are getting challenged much
[Guest]: more you put out something which doesn't make sense to somebody they will tell you that earlier
[Guest]: that they couldn't it was hard very hard they have to write a letter to you you need not open
[Guest]: the envelope you know before i mean before email or anything like that then they could write email
[Guest]: to you you need not read the email delete it quickly whatever but now you can't everybody's
[Guest]: in your living room basically in some some senses virtually so and it puts some pressures to be more
[Guest]: careful i think you know in some ways and one has to be careful about whose feedback you care about
[Guest]: what kind of feedback you take seriously but it is a i think overall for our life not yet so clear
[Guest]: that these things are bad for what we do it's good to hear from lots of people and to have people
[Guest]: citizens they have the opportunity to you know tear down the mighty you know because often the
[Guest]: mighty also have clay feet and it's a good thing that anybody can be challenged and questioned
[Guest]: immediately and only thing i say that hopefully we will use this power with great power comes
[Guest]: great responsibility as the wise philosopher uncle ben said so and i think that's for each
[Guest]: citizen to exercise and it's a great thing politicians have always lived like this you
[Guest]: know even before social media if i'm an average politician you could meet 50 people in a day
[Guest]: who tell them different things so they have taken to social media like a fish to water
[Guest]: for others it's more kind of getting used to i you know this could also be the title of a book
[Amit Varma]: everybody is in your living room like can there be something that is more terrifying for an
[Amit Varma]: introvert like me i don't want anyone in my living room not even me oh you still have a choice right
[Guest]: you don't you don't get on it it's a as of now there are still avenues available where you don't
[Guest]: have to get into this any i know people who don't even have a smartphone don't i don't have any
[Guest]: social media at all and they're able to live perfectly good lives professionally they're
[Amit Varma]: not compromised in any way i think what happens there is that like there is that saying right
[Amit Varma]: from kashi kasi bhar mein jaye duniya hum bhajaye harmoniya right so you can take that choice and
[Amit Varma]: say ki chalo harmoniya bhajate hain but the point is if you want to engage if you want to make a
[Amit Varma]: difference you actually kind of have no choice you have to go out there in some way or the other
[Amit Varma]: i mean i also use my twitter like you're saying you do just broadcast the links and not really
[Amit Varma]: engage because no one's engaging in good faith there's very little point in doing that but you
[Amit Varma]: know sometimes there are that there are just kind of uh trade-offs everywhere some of our best
[Guest]: scholars in carnegie don't even have a twitter account that's why they are the best scholars
[Guest]: yeah exactly so i i think i mean this is i mean sometimes useful sometimes not useful but it's
[Guest]: certainly avoidable if you want to avoid it as of now in the future maybe you will have to put in
[Guest]: your cv your social media and all when it comes to that we'll see but as of now it's not a necessary
[Guest]: thing for in at least in our milieu and quite a few scholars in at least in our community they
[Guest]: they use it very sparingly or use it in a manner that is constructive you know and those who don't
[Guest]: and you will get big become to take reaches then it's i mean i think it changes them as a researcher
[Guest]: in some ways you know that when you start using a technology and then your primary identity becomes
[Guest]: the user of the technology you know in the and it's sometimes works i mean it is not a universal
[Guest]: insight about technology i think as some philosophers have argued but it it is something
[Amit Varma]: that is applicable on some cases yeah yeah and what's a worst case scenario if carnegie ever
[Amit Varma]: comes to you and says so yes sure you have to put out 40 tweets a day and you gotta engage and let
[Amit Varma]: the world in your living room you can just say let's talk a little bit about some of the areas
[Amit Varma]: in which you've you know in which you worked and thought about and so on and so forth and one of
[Amit Varma]: them really broadly is sort of the indian economy like in one of your recent newsletters you begin
[Amit Varma]: by quoting this famous paper by robert lucas where he are a 1988 paper where he asked quote
[Amit Varma]: is there some action a government of india could take that would lead the indian economy to grow
[Amit Varma]: like indonesia's or egypt's if so what exactly if not what is it about the nature of india that
[Amit Varma]: makes it so the consequences of human for human welfare involved in questions like these are
[Amit Varma]: simply staggering once one starts to think about them it is hard to think about anything else stop
[Amit Varma]: code and this was of course written in 88 and as it happens we turned around we have a broad
[Amit Varma]: mota mota sense of what we needed to do differently because we did a lot of it it worked for us some
[Amit Varma]: of that momentum has gone i've had episodes with people like puja mera and our mutual friend the
[Amit Varma]: wonderful ajay shah and shruti rajgopalan and all that on how we had this golden period between 91
[Amit Varma]: and 2011 and hundreds of millions came out of poverty but a lot of that has reversed slowed
[Amit Varma]: changed and at some level it's also a question of mindsets like something that ajay has said
[Amit Varma]: in past episodes with me and has made a deep impression on me is that there was a time where
[Amit Varma]: there was this community of policy makers and change makers within government both bureaucrats
[Amit Varma]: and sometimes politicians who saw sense in it who wanted change who played for change who knew the
[Amit Varma]: game who knew the direction and his lament was that they may be dying out that within the government
[Amit Varma]: there may not be so many people in policy who are thinking in those sort of ways and looking ahead
[Amit Varma]: and also another lament that he had is that many of our finest minds are in economics are actually
[Amit Varma]: involved in playing the academic circle game my words not his but this is broadly the sense of it
[Guest]: are involved in playing the academic circles again which which entirely loses connection with
[Amit Varma]: the real world right so so so what is your sense on kind of both of these and these are like two
[Amit Varma]: really large questions so i'm really sorry for unleashing them but one uh your potted view
[Amit Varma]: on where the indian economy is today and how hopeful should we be and to this ecosystem of
[Amit Varma]: change you know that can we turn it around again that fine you know we had some tough times and we
[Amit Varma]: were already you know not doing well before covid covid of course exacerbated it to some extent
[Amit Varma]: but where is the hope for the indian economy and to drill down on that is that hope coming
[Amit Varma]: from within the ecosystem is there still you know are there young shahs and kilkers in the system
[Guest]: yeah these are big questions so let me i mean offer like as usual i mean this stream of
[Guest]: consciousness answer and see if it works so first thing is that in our milieu in the way we and you
[Guest]: and i move around we overstate the role played by economists and understate the role played by
[Guest]: politicians and civil servants in in the achievements that we have had as a country
[Guest]: especially since the 90s and maybe in parts of 80s as well so there is obviously a credit very
[Guest]: due to give credit wherever who came with a good idea pushed it had the perfect perseverance to
[Guest]: see it through but there is a as i said there is a system in which we operate and that is a
[Guest]: democratic system there is a permanent civil service and there is a democratic system of
[Guest]: elections and give shifting of power based on elections and people who are in power
[Guest]: do things so a couple of things one is that we are a political economy in which we did
[Guest]: 91 which was a big bang reform reforms continued through the 90s in that in the 90s we had
[Guest]: three very different orientation governments there was a Narasimha Rao government then there
[Guest]: was a third front government under two different prime ministers UDF and then the right of center
[Guest]: so to speak PGP led NDA government came in but the reforms continued throughout right
[Guest]: and that was a political decision that there was some kind of a consensus you can say that was
[Guest]: there within the political and administrative class you know and that this is important and
[Guest]: we will continue to do this and continue to ease the binding constraints continue to push the
[Guest]: policy in the right direction and do whatever is necessary not just policy reforms do whatever is
[Guest]: necessary and I emphasize that because it can mean many things to keep growth going you know
[Guest]: that's very important and so we had so I did a literature review on when did India's high
[Guest]: growth episode start and there is a literature on this and reasonable persons have disagreed
[Guest]: on where and when it start but I had concluded based on a recent paper that it's 93 onwards
[Guest]: basically and then 2002 onwards we had a really high growth episode and the question is whether
[Guest]: the high growth episode has ended or not that's the question that we need to ask we don't know
[Guest]: it's these things are unfortunately understood only retrospectively but decisions have to be
[Guest]: taken right and you know there's a famous quote by R.L. Stevenson that even the worst of the
[Guest]: historians know much better about the period they study than the best of us know about the period
[Guest]: in which we live and unfortunately or fortunately we have to think about what the current period you
[Guest]: know the past is the past and to the extent possible and it's not easily available to us
[Guest]: all the facts available to understand what's happening right now we need to understand
[Guest]: what's happening have situational awareness, awareness of the state of the economy,
[Guest]: underlying sources of dynamism the economy which are continuing which are not continuing how what
[Guest]: can we do to you know keep the dynamism going you know there is a very important role to be
[Guest]: played by this and I am not saying this needs to be done on a local level this is a national
[Guest]: conversation because nations grow you know I mean obviously growth drivers are local and
[Guest]: individuals set up businesses, local governments solve problems and all but it is we as a country
[Guest]: we started growing in the 90s right that was our I mean it wasn't like before 90s said some states
[Guest]: were rich and other states were poor you know obviously relatively some were better off and
[Guest]: but it was a very narrow range you know everybody was clustered around that same
[Guest]: small the richest state was only three times of the poorest state you know at that time.
[Guest]: As we opened up and we started seeing growth accelerate some states just rushed forward and
[Guest]: became I mean fairly in fact some of the richest states in India have the per capita income of
[Guest]: China basically you know so and the poorest states are quite poor and but the most important thing is
[Guest]: that the rate at which our poorest state Bihar namely has grown since the 90s is higher than
[Guest]: the rate at which India Indian economy was growing previous to that. So, let's not forget that
[Guest]: improvement even in the state which is the bottom of the pile which had a decade of
[Guest]: almost zero real growth in the 90s has benefited from this episode. So, inequality we have
[Guest]: emphasized too much and we don't pay enough attention to that whole you know cake is
[Guest]: growing and everybody is getting persuasion and then constitutional mechanisms are there to
[Guest]: make sure Bihar also gets some part of the benefits from other countries so it's able to
[Guest]: provide some minimum level of services for its citizens as well through the finance commission
[Guest]: mechanism and all. So, we have one country and some states marched ahead and Bihar which is
[Guest]: remain poor UP is also poor they also their entrepreneurs went and set up businesses in
[Guest]: Bangalore and Bombay their labor went workers went capital also flowed in fact because they
[Guest]: didn't have enough businesses in those states so capital flowed to the richer states from these
[Guest]: states and we have one country and being a part of this country is very beneficial for each state
[Guest]: those states that marched ahead benefited from being a part of this country because
[Guest]: their products could be sold in these states factors of production other than land everything
[Guest]: can move across state boundaries easily relatively they could move and set up.
[Guest]: So, we have benefited a lot from this period and it's been done because there was some kind of a
[Guest]: political consensus at the national and state levels in many states there's a variation in
[Guest]: different states how much they could make of this period and some states couldn't make as
[Guest]: much as they could and others could make a lot more like Punjab for example is an example of
[Guest]: a state which fell behind it was the richest state in 1990 and now it's basically very close
[Guest]: to the national average it's a pretty bad story in that sense and it's not doing as badly in
[Guest]: absolute terms as say Bihar or UP but it's I mean relative position has really fallen
[Guest]: and there are states like Tamil Nadu and Telangana, Haryana and all which have really marched ahead
[Guest]: you know since these reforms happened and overall I think lots of ways to problematize what has
[Guest]: happened but I think it's been a pretty significant success compared to our own past
[Guest]: and also compared to what is generally seen in comparative sense. So, one of the things is that
[Guest]: democracies usually don't go very rapidly I mean democracies are rich so obviously you'll say why
[Guest]: how does not rapid growth is a different form of being rich because you can get rich over 150 years
[Guest]: which is the story of the most immature democracies in the world developed countries in
[Guest]: west mostly but democracies usually grow at a moderate rate and generally not just democracies
[Guest]: for any country to grow for a rapid rate for a very long period of time is very difficult it's
[Guest]: very rare so regression to mean is the rule and these are exceptions and the longer the growth
[Guest]: episode is going the more the chances of you regressing back to the mean so the
[Guest]: adaptive efficiency you need which I mean using Nicholas North's language to continue with the
[Guest]: growth episode is quite significant you know and you need to have a political economy which is
[Guest]: very adaptive and which is very mindful of the imbalances that are getting built up across
[Guest]: different parts of the economy what are the kind of new problems that are emerging and address those
[Guest]: and it's a political and administrative problem you know economists researchers can play a small
[Guest]: role in that very small and the main thing is the political settlement and political agreement and
[Guest]: having the right incentive to solve those problems having a sense of importance of that and and some
[Guest]: degree of I mean even though people fight elections and they are always trying to destroy each other's
[Guest]: political legitimacy there is some true underlying agreement and development and growth are very
[Guest]: important and there's something not to be disrupted I think that is the foundation on which this is
[Guest]: built and I think we had that we have whether we have it now or not I have a question but we had
[Guest]: that for a long time and especially in the 90s so one of the things that I always point out is that
[Guest]: our private investments took off in the 2000s 90s there was no noticeable growth in private
[Guest]: investments and because I mean we had to the polity has to establish some degree of one way
[Guest]: to read it many ways to read these facts I'm not saying that my way is only way same facts can be
[Guest]: reconciled with multiple narratives that's the way history works but one way to read it is that
[Guest]: we had to establish that credible commitment that we are here to do the reforms and the direction
[Guest]: will be one way and we will keep liberalizing and opening up and giving you more opportunities
[Guest]: and please invest and then in the 2000s private investment took off in the early 2010s private
[Guest]: investments have been very low private investment basically fell and private investment was the
[Guest]: main driver of growth in the 2000s which are the best years for our economy 2002 onwards
[Guest]: and then they have been low export was the other major driver continued from 90s to 2000s
[Guest]: the export of the major driver that has also slowed down significantly since 2011 onwards 12
[Guest]: 12 onwards so 12 or 13 if I'm not getting the year right so these are drivers of growth you know
[Guest]: for an economy like India and some people can make an argument that it's the consumption that
[Guest]: should be driving and we have done enough of the accumulation now we need to do redistribution and
[Guest]: all I my own judgment is we're not in that stage of growth there will be a situation it could be
[Guest]: a situation in the future like where Japan reaches the 90s where domestic consumption
[Guest]: take off and it just stagnated you know that it just kept on the accumulation cycle Hirschman
[Guest]: has this dynamic between accumulation and redistribution which is the dynamic has to play
[Guest]: out for the economy to sustain itself its growth so anyway there are matters of judgment but the
[Guest]: basic thing is that the two drivers of growth export and private investment which were driving
[Guest]: a growth in that way basically slowed down significantly in the 2010s and they didn't
[Guest]: really pick up before the pandemic hit at that time and there were some short periods of upswing
[Guest]: but nothing substantial that was happening and lots of different narratives have been offered
[Guest]: to why that happened and all of that and I mean we can go into that then the pandemic hit so but
[Guest]: before the pandemic hit our role our growth in the previous year 2019-20 was 3.7 percent
[Guest]: if I'm not remembering if I'm doing it right it was 3.7 percent and investment growth was very
[Guest]: very low and I mean basically all across all the components on the demand side there was a
[Guest]: low investment, government consumption, private consumption was actually the fastest of the lot
[Guest]: but it wasn't the economy was not growing much then the pandemic hit and we had a obviously
[Guest]: lockdown and all and we had a very low very big contraction in the economy and then we had a
[Guest]: recovery in 2021-22 right and now last couple of years what has happened is our ability to make
[Guest]: sense of the year-on-year data is you know intuitively it's not the same right because
[Guest]: we need to track with a pre-pandemic performance so a lot of headlines look very different
[Guest]: because hey year-on-year look will look like but the main question that I have in my mind
[Guest]: which I'm trying to understand is that did the issues that were there in the pre-pandemic period
[Guest]: just go away or are they still there what were those issues why was private investment not
[Guest]: taking off for 10 years why was exports not picking up you know at that time now we've had
[Guest]: some short-term periods of good export growth I hope it sustains I pray it sustains because it's
[Guest]: a major driver of growth in India but that's a question that we need to answer because it's
[Guest]: very important and very difficult to sustain long periods of rapid growth but that's what
[Guest]: we need to do that's what China did right China did 40 years plus of rapid growth its economy
[Guest]: has been slowing recently it's changed its political economy approach but India has had
[Guest]: rapid growth for at least two decades perhaps longer in between the debate got a little
[Guest]: vitiated because of the GDP numbers controversy whether the GDP is capturing the actual economic
[Guest]: activity and growth in it but lately I mean especially just before the pandemic there
[Guest]: was some correspondence because other indicators are looking bad and GDP indicator itself also
[Guest]: looking very bad so I mean but apart from these these debates I think there's a substantive
[Guest]: question about what would it take to continue a rapid growth episode by defying history you know
[Guest]: because very few countries have been able to sustain growth for more than two decades or
[Guest]: something they do regress to the mean and then there are periods of relatively moderate or low
[Guest]: growth and then they go back so but because we gain a lot from this period you know so in fact
[Guest]: growth one thing I want to just focus on growth is the most important thing to focus on economic
[Guest]: growth is the thing everything and so if you look at all other you can pick any development indicator
[Guest]: you care about which is material development I'm not about political and all we've been in
[Guest]: democracy for a long time it's great all of those things are there but regional development if you
[Guest]: talk about improvement in health education improvement in availability of material I mean
[Guest]: things like housing you know those things the nature natural environment and all of that
[Guest]: very highly correlated with economic I mean GDP per capita all of those not no exceptions
[Guest]: I mean it is stunning how much growth can do for you you know so for an 11 for love
[Guest]: some one level of income you can do a little better by spending a little more efficiently
[Guest]: in some areas but not a whole lot ultimate binding constraint is having more resources
[Guest]: you know which is what GDP per capita reflects that how much resource is available what is the
[Guest]: basically the value of the goods and services you produce and that reflected in a per capita basis.
[Guest]: So in some areas we do a little better some example primary education and all we do
[Guest]: worse than our even our level of income in terms of the educational quality right the
[Guest]: learning outcomes are quite poor in India so we could do better on those perhaps even for
[Guest]: our level of income little better than some area like air quality we do worse than even
[Guest]: countries at our level of income we could do better on those but in most areas if you want
[Guest]: any significant improvement you need to get growth going to have more resources to be able to do
[Guest]: more with with those because this is the main kind of
[Guest]: underlying driver you know when everything correlates with one thing then you have to
[Guest]: think about is it just correlation or is there some kind of causality going one way so I see
[Guest]: that there is a complex relationship with our human capital we talked about health education there is
[Guest]: obviously some other side I mean the two-way causality growth helps you do more of those
[Guest]: but the more better human capital gives you growth so there is that of course but focusing on growth
[Guest]: gets a lot done is is my world view I mean reasonable persons can disagree about how
[Guest]: much weightage to give to it but I think it is the most important thing to get it right
[Guest]: and it in our own history right our impact on poverty rate our impact on well-being across
[Guest]: many many indicators has been much better since we grew it is I agree in some areas
[Guest]: an uncertain glory we have done worse than we should even have at our level of income in some
[Guest]: areas but if you want to get much better this is a necessary condition you know and in many cases
[Guest]: sufficient in some cases not sufficient but it's certainly necessary to get continue to grow
[Guest]: rapidly and then later we'll get into demographic issues as well and in the essay I think which you
[Guest]: have cited I had shown how India has been related to the rest of the world you know and in the first
[Guest]: three decades of our day after independence our relative position in the world may have fallen
[Guest]: at least on the data that I am referring to may not be fully representative because all countries
[Guest]: data were not available at that time but it was a pretty bad performance especially in 60s and 70s
[Guest]: it's only in 80s we started growing at a moderate rate but against a very bad two decades so I mean
[Guest]: it was more of a recovery happening at that time and in 90s we actually got embarked on a proper
[Guest]: rapid growth episode and we need to be able to sustain it I mean and that requires I mean
[Guest]: consensus on growth you know that this is a very important priority this is the top priority this
[Guest]: is the thing and we are a federal polity we are a polity where power resides at multiple levels
[Guest]: levels even in dominant party system where there is one party dominant at the national level state
[Guest]: level there is still quite a bit of competition even at national level even though you are dominant
[Guest]: party there are other places where power is there sometimes judges can do something others can do
[Guest]: so you need to create consensus for these things because you can do some try to do something but
[Guest]: it can be disrupted either way so state government is trying to do something center can disrupt it
[Guest]: center is trying to do something state governments can disrupt it so some degree of consensus
[Guest]: building around this these issues is very important so that at least from a developmental perspective
[Guest]: I mean reasonable policies are made and implemented and reasonable systems are put in
[Guest]: place to take the right decision at the local level even if the policy is not necessarily
[Guest]: fully followed in the to the letter and I think those are important questions and I
[Guest]: thought about in many ways so how anti-corruption strategies in the last 10 years have worked out
[Guest]: and changed bureaucratic behavior and incentives of bureaucrats to take decisions how state capital
[Guest]: relations have changed might have changed looking at in rising disputes between the state and
[Guest]: private capital especially on the tax side but also in enforcement direct rate and all those
[Guest]: so when one is trying to make sense of things which are not easy to directly study
[Guest]: because it's a hidden aspect of a political reality what we read is the de jure and the
[Guest]: headline but what happens on on the ground is not so easily directly so I talk to business people
[Guest]: I try to get a sense of before after what changed what was happening earlier what has changed now
[Guest]: I look at whatever data is available try to make sense of these things.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah and I couldn't agree with you more strongly about the importance of growth you know Nitin
[Amit Varma]: Pai once pointed out that for every one percent rise in GDP two million people came out of poverty
[Amit Varma]: and I think the estimate has actually gone up since he last mentioned that that has staggering
[Amit Varma]: humanitarian consequences growth is not just you know statistics or lines on a graph it affects
[Amit Varma]: the lives of real people and I'm sometimes astonished that there is still an intellectual
[Amit Varma]: class of people quote-unquote who still question the 91 reforms who still you know question growth
[Amit Varma]: who are whose brains are still full of the nonsensical dogma that was in vogue 70 years ago
[Amit Varma]: and it kind of just boggles my mind but luckily like you said that you know maybe intellectuals
[Amit Varma]: are not that relevant in the real world and that's a good thing you know people can see
[Guest]: what's good for them one sort of hopes so I think one issue is inequality they focus too much on
[Guest]: that one metric and some of them have some ideological or psychological reasons to giving
[Guest]: for giving too much emphasis on that one value if they give too much well emphasis on them by
[Guest]: them that one value of equality then obviously last 30 years look a little worse than they do
[Guest]: to you and me who have a different set of values so there is a difference on that so I mean it is
[Amit Varma]: what it is I mean just to reiterate and regular listeners of the show will know but it's something
[Amit Varma]: I feel really strongly about that inequality and poverty are different things you know the
[Amit Varma]: thought experiment question I often ask people is in which of these two countries would be would
[Amit Varma]: you rather be poor the USA or Bangladesh and obviously everybody would rather be poor in the
[Guest]: USA yeah but the truth is there is better than being better off in India or Bangladesh so in
[Amit Varma]: that same essay let me finish the point I was making and the reason for that the reason they
[Amit Varma]: would choose the USA is because poverty is less even though inequality is far greater in the US
[Amit Varma]: than Bangladesh you know it's it's a pattern of developing countries that when you're coming out
[Amit Varma]: of poverty your poverty rates go down as your inequality goes up because we don't live in a
[Amit Varma]: zero-sum world it is not the case that if the rich are getting richer the poor poor must be
[Amit Varma]: getting poorer it is the case that they are both getting richer and the rich are of course getting
[Amit Varma]: richer at a higher rate so inequality increases and the moral imperative for any country which
[Amit Varma]: has these rates of poverty is reduce the poverty as fast as possible so what we have had since 91
[Amit Varma]: is poverty has gone down massively inequality has gone up so what it doesn't matter that's
[Guest]: a wrong metric we are not in a zero-sum world yes absolutely in fact if you look at income
[Guest]: distributions I've done some quick analysis on this and perform my essays that if the household
[Guest]: income at the 90th percentile in India is about the same as the household income at the 15th
[Guest]: percentile in the US so I mean a poor household earns as much as a much better off right their
[Guest]: 90th percentile is better off than 9 out of 10 households is basically so I mean that's the
[Guest]: impulse for immigration right that you suddenly go and become a part of a history of another
[Guest]: place because each square foot in this planet has its own history and suddenly you supplant
[Guest]: yourself from one history to another history and profit from the years of struggle that went into
[Guest]: making that history right where you could just land up in a place and suddenly be much much
[Guest]: better off at least materially and and it's quite a painful thing I was I remember I was on a flight
[Guest]: from here to Europe and there was going through Abu Dhabi and I was sitting next to this guy who
[Guest]: was crying and he was like a middle-aged man who was crying and after a while I thought I should
[Guest]: talk to him at least I don't know whether I can comfort him and all he may have gone through some
[Guest]: tragedy or something but he was literally like crying you know and he was from Punjab and he
[Guest]: told me that he's going to work at Abu Dhabi and I said okay I didn't ask him why are you crying I
[Guest]: just kept talking to him because you know I don't want to approach that directly and also to a
[Guest]: middle-aged man it's a it's very difficult to talk about this thing but he opened up immediately he
[Guest]: said I am a plumber from district of Punjab and I'm going to Abu Dhabi for work and I was there
[Guest]: and I came back for to with my family for a month and a month or two months I don't remember
[Guest]: and I'm now going back there for work and I my daughter is six years old now and I last I saw
[Guest]: her when she was four and now I'm seeing her at six and now I'll see her and I can't deal with it
[Guest]: so I said then I asked how much do you earn you know that and it's a completely different kind
[Guest]: of level of income that you get there right like even as a plumber you will four or five times or
[Guest]: something but you run a plumber in your small town in there and simply I mean human beings are the
[Guest]: same we are not dumber or anything like that it's just institutions basically I mean of course there
[Guest]: are natural resource rich countries that's a different category but for the rest all kinds
[Guest]: of countries have become prosperous South Korea didn't get rich by natural resources which China
[Guest]: didn't get it's just getting the institution and mechanisms right and having the right kind
[Guest]: of arrangements to just you know do what is necessary to get rich it's a amazing tragedy
[Guest]: people from my village I mean it's within the country you would go to Bombay to work and then
[Guest]: come back and see your family after six months or a year and go abroad in fact if they don't come
[Guest]: back for two years often because it's very expensive to come back and you lose wages
[Guest]: plus pay for the flight and all of that for two years once in two years go see your children and
[Guest]: your family and it's a moral failure to not get growth going and it was so this kind of I mean
[Guest]: I give a lot of benefit of doubt people have their reasons to believe what they believe
[Guest]: but I can't get this too much now especially now that we have seen all kind of destinations have
[Guest]: fallen apart and fallen away and we've actually delivered good growth maybe some sources of
[Guest]: growth had histories going back to the before the 90s but even earlier we could have grown
[Guest]: more rapidly this argument that oh if we hadn't done the patent act earlier to then we wouldn't
[Guest]: have been able to benefit from trips and all these are all just excuses broadly speaking
[Guest]: three or three decades we didn't deliver on the promise and then since then we have done
[Guest]: much better inequalities one thing that some people quite quite obsess about it they have
[Amit Varma]: their own reasons for it I mean these are foreign fashions right these are kids who will go abroad
[Amit Varma]: they'll do PhD in American university whatever it may be import a mindset from there and
[Amit Varma]: intellectually lazy fuckers not doing any thinking for themselves I mean I'm not going to mince my
[Guest]: words I get the anger it's just a question that I mean I think the country is more or less moved
[Guest]: on from that most people now understand that I mean intuitively there is some sense that this
[Guest]: happens and I wish there was more of this consensus in the class in which we move there's
[Guest]: still much more doubt about these things and the economy and neoliberalism is still a pejorative
[Amit Varma]: you know it's a it's a you know I try to understand because these are people born to privilege
[Amit Varma]: they they never had to fight for their next meal right they these are people born to privilege it
[Amit Varma]: is okay but ask the people who are benefiting from the who have benefited who have come out
[Amit Varma]: of poverty from the opening up of markets you know and ask that plumber who is crying on a plane why
[Amit Varma]: he won't see his daughter again for two years that is it's a moral tragedy and it's a moral tragedy
[Guest]: caused by flawed thinking or thinking and yeah I think anyway I mean they're all there are worse
[Guest]: people in this world so I mean we can I don't obsess too much about this stuff people have all
[Amit Varma]: kind of you're worried that all your colleagues will think I'm talking about them I mean
[Guest]: fortunately none of my immediate colleagues actually think in this way so but anyway the
[Guest]: point I want I'm trying to make is that this is an important moral imperative that we that that we
[Guest]: have and it's a it's it's it's a political priority should be a political priority and it should be
[Guest]: in a way if we get focused on this hopefully some of the other stuff that we are too focused on
[Guest]: right now or I simplistic identity politics and all will also kind of fall lower on the priority
[Guest]: but that's just a aside I'm not saying that's going to happen I'm saying that it should be
[Guest]: a priority it should be the top three priorities or four or five priorities and then we do other
[Guest]: things because many things are tied to this many many other things that we want to have
[Guest]: are tied to this and the one one thing about this world is that now many many countries are rich and
[Guest]: you the best of your people will leave and they already were leaving earlier than we had so a
[Guest]: country gives you two things right it gives you opportunities to build some capabilities and
[Guest]: other is to use those capabilities well to flourish economically and materially and there
[Guest]: are other things they do I mean I'm also economic aspects but country economics does two things
[Guest]: we had institutions that will give you capability but not opportunities to do make more of these so
[Guest]: the decisions were very one-sided that you get easy to take a decision to go to IIT
[Guest]: but very difficult to take a decision to stay in India so so there you had this huge brain drain
[Guest]: fortunately some people are now coming back they're setting up or somewhere many are not
[Guest]: going in the first place to set up businesses here so that's a very good thing I mean all of
[Guest]: that happened because you we did better on governance and institutions you know that's and
[Guest]: people could and we are still a young country and there's so many people who want to do this
[Guest]: build businesses I mean across various sectors we can do much better and I think we should continue
[Guest]: that story and if we fall off that and if we lose that sense of consensus and we start try to
[Guest]: thinking think more in you know Malthusian ways that hey if that state party succeeds in delivering
[Guest]: growth then I will lose my political legitimacy and all of that which is creating a lot of this
[Guest]: interstate I mean conflicts in some ways because politics is just overriding everything else in
[Guest]: this kind of politics yeah we will probably compromise on this because because one of one
[Guest]: thing is there that as I keep harping on the 90s consensus you know some consensus was there and
[Guest]: also coalitions coalition politics literal formal politician politics that allowed that made
[Guest]: consensus necessary where different regional parties went out and helped create consensus
[Guest]: for specific reforms and there are a couple of good books on this worth reading and there's a
[Guest]: I mean that's the way political economy of growth in a democracy works you know and unfortunately
[Guest]: when a dominant party then the need for consensus goes away and you end up making more mistakes
[Guest]: so then you have to willfully go and seek what would work what are the different interest groups
[Guest]: who's going to lose out how do I make it good for them you know it's a democracy purely utilitarian
[Guest]: frames may limit because even a small vocal minority can stop a reform from happening and
[Guest]: we've seen that happening a few times so I think it's very important to think about it in through
[Guest]: democratic and political processes and what is the how does that shape to the institutions and
[Guest]: policies that actually deliver the conditions in which growth can happen growth is done by markets
[Guest]: and private enterprise primarily but there are things that state has to do to be able to support
[Guest]: it and yeah I think it's a very important question and so as I was saying earlier that it's a
[Guest]: national question I always think about as a national question the way framed is that nations
[Guest]: are economically consequential political units you know they're politically economically
[Guest]: consequential because you see so much difference across nations and within nations is not that
[Guest]: much you know like for all the inequality that we have in India if you compare inequality across
[Guest]: India and other countries especially developed countries it's not even close the intra country
[Guest]: inequality that we have even our richest state for example is maybe a quarter of the per capita
[Guest]: income the poorest state in the US so it's not even close in terms of where you are and we
[Guest]: harp so much over this inequality as an issue so I always say like I never write about inequality
[Guest]: in that in that sense I care about it in some ways some specific ways like gender inequality
[Guest]: for example I worry about low female participation I worry about inclusion across I mean if there are
[Guest]: some systematic ways in which certain people are being excluded and it's a problem not just
[Guest]: for growth but also a moral problem for society in that sense but not in this macro way of
[Guest]: inequality that class thinking that okay this is you have to go one level below and say is there
[Guest]: any structural kind of bias that are going for certain kind of people are not able to participate
[Guest]: in the process that obviously we all care about because in that sense inequality actually harms
[Guest]: your growth you know exactly that's a different kind of analysis you know and but that's not
[Guest]: that analysis doesn't need to critique the entire growth episode that we have had and it was the
[Guest]: kind of growth episode we actually competed with the world right we look at our export growth you
[Guest]: know our export as a percent of GDP in 1990 was about the same as it was in 1950 and it just
[Guest]: increased very rapidly after that even then we are a very small part of the world trade we have a
[Guest]: very very long way to go we are punching way below our weight in many areas we have moderately
[Guest]: complex products that we make and export we can make more complex products which are more valuable
[Guest]: and give more GDP we can more more kind of products to export so export can be a major driver of
[Guest]: Indian growth there's no doubt we are punching way below our weight two percent of the world
[Guest]: trade is not where we should be you know much higher in terms of GDP you know in the world
[Guest]: but in trade share is much smaller we should be able to do much more we need to create conditions
[Guest]: for more private investment and that I think is a sure shot I mean more or less sure shot way to
[Guest]: you know at least for a decade or so we need to worry I mean there will be a situation in which
[Guest]: we need to worry too much much more on domestic consumption and all of that worry but my judgment
[Guest]: of this situation is we are not there yet we need to get more can continue the accumulation stage
[Guest]: and then we can say okay distribution and all the issues become very important also see for our
[Guest]: level of income we tax more of the GDP than most countries did at this level of income or we borrow
[Guest]: more as percent of GDP than most of our comparable countries so it's not like the state is not taxing
[Guest]: and borrowing and we can talk about how to tax better and borrow better maybe we can do less
[Guest]: financial depression on the borrowing side we can have more efficient tax system on the expenditure
[Guest]: side we can talk about better allocative and operational efficiency as a democracy we can
[Guest]: debate what is worth spending on how to spend on it all those are very important conversation
[Guest]: but if anybody argues that we should be taxing more and borrowing more at level of GDP the onus
[Guest]: is on them to prove why why it can be done well because I am showing you I mean evidence I mean
[Guest]: very clear evidence that we are actually taxing pretty large part of the GDP larger than we should
[Guest]: at this I mean we usually continue at this level of development so all those are myths obviously but
[Guest]: so without growth how are you going to even deliver on the all the good stuff that you want
[Guest]: to you know redistribute and do more for people you know so I think there is a and we could do
[Guest]: so much more when since we started growing we could do more of subsidies and welfare schemes
[Guest]: and all there is a lot of critique on how it was done how much of it went to middle class and all
[Guest]: of that I completely agree with that I've said that's what I should study also so all that is
[Guest]: there but I'm telling you it's a very small part of the problem much bigger problem is to how to
[Amit Varma]: get to that twenty thousand dollar GDP at least per capita I think without growth we are like
[Amit Varma]: a guy standing in a bucket trying to lift up the bucket you know ain't gonna happen that's
[Amit Varma]: how futile it feels so here's the thing we've been talking for like 19 hours or something
[Amit Varma]: in a basement studio we are running out of air by my calculations a current level at the current
[Amit Varma]: levels of oxygen we'll kind of survive for eight minutes maybe nine or maybe an hour I don't know
[Amit Varma]: we could try it out and see which one of us collapses first so what I'll do is now I'll
[Amit Varma]: ask you a bunch of questions kind of like a rapid fire but not rapid rapid but ask you for potted
[Amit Varma]: answers on these issues because I feel like I haven't you know got even 10 percent of the insights
[Amit Varma]: that I know you have within you to so give so first of my potted questions and you can think
[Amit Varma]: about this because it's it's what nuances does conventional thinking on economics in India miss
[Amit Varma]: or the political economy in India miss you we've already spoken about how conventional
[Amit Varma]: thinking is wrong and you know inequality that poverty is a bigger problem you've already
[Amit Varma]: mentioned how people think economists are more influential than they actually are and it's really
[Amit Varma]: politicians and bureaucrats who make a much greater difference what other insights do you have about
[Amit Varma]: the political economy and the our economy which which go against conventional wisdom or which
[Guest]: people may not know I think we should pay more attention to incentives of bureaucrats to take
[Guest]: the right decisions in the right circumstances and feel secure in taking those decisions which
[Guest]: are developmental decisions which will pay attention second is we need to pay more attention
[Guest]: to the political settlement which basically has bulk of the power to decide who gets what and how
[Guest]: things are arranged and creating the necessity of creating some baseline agreement on developmental
[Guest]: issues across different levels of government is very important third is we need to focus more on
[Guest]: the reality of political economy than just the de jure policies I mean those are important for
[Guest]: sure and in some cases their change can also change reality but we need to take to reality
[Guest]: which means we need to shape the incentives of people who take decisions and who invest
[Guest]: and what what do they look at what are the signals they are looking for before investing and all of
[Guest]: that what kind of signals do you want to send to that so the communications and narratives matter
[Guest]: quite a bit I think and they will shape future expectations and you can have you can sustain
[Guest]: growth then there is a I think it's quite important to in some senses do reforms you know
[Guest]: but like for example we always talk about there are factor market reforms that are to be done in
[Guest]: India and land labor all of that but in that we need to think more carefully about what are the
[Guest]: kind of bargains that can be struck which will make the reforms more sustainable politically
[Guest]: you know you can't have reforms where there are losers who of the reform who feel aggrieved and
[Guest]: it's a democracy and you need to think democratically about reforms and there are
[Guest]: people who you may think are getting undue benefits through whatever existing arrangement
[Guest]: but the fact of the matter that they have a voice and they can make things difficult and they have a
[Guest]: right to make it difficult for you and therefore finding bargains whether it's in agriculture
[Guest]: whether it's in labor whether it's in land markets and all which make the reform more sustainable
[Guest]: is should be the focus of the reformist when reform minded thinkers and civil servants and
[Guest]: all of that and I think we are seeing some of that I mean not as much as would be good
[Guest]: but we are seeing some of that and also continuing the strengths of our democracy we should harness
[Guest]: the strength of our democracy now all of these points I made is working towards this one point
[Guest]: which is that we got rapid growth in a coalition era with all kind of arrogant independent
[Guest]: institutions saying whatever they wanted to say a press which made the life of government very
[Guest]: very difficult often challenging it weak governments which with minority I mean leading parties
[Guest]: and necessity of coalition even smallest party could basically make the government fall and we
[Guest]: got really rapid growth I mean for it especially for democracy but even generally we were among
[Guest]: the fastest growing economies in the world the second fastest growing large economy in the world
[Guest]: for a very long time while having those kind of institutional settings and that kind of a
[Guest]: democratic setup so we should harness those you know we should harness those very carefully and
[Guest]: see how we got that growth so most important thing to learn from our own past experience
[Guest]: is good to look at Korea and China and all of that for some purposes but our own past is very
[Guest]: instructive there's a lot to learn from there how it worked what worked we may not replicate what we
[Guest]: did that's not going to work now the economy has changed the world has changed but at a meta level
[Guest]: there's a lot of insight on how we harness our democratic institutions and our democratic
[Amit Varma]: processes to get things done wise words let's what are your views on our democracy and particularly
[Amit Varma]: relevant since for years you've been telling me to read talkable talking about talkable his thoughts
[Amit Varma]: on democracy were also particularly acute and came out of again the experience of it of
[Amit Varma]: specifically of traveling through America at that stage in in the history so what are you know when
[Amit Varma]: you look at India's democracy it's you know there are many things right with it there are many things
[Amit Varma]: wrong with it what is sort of your sense of you know where we stand so I'm actually very very
[Guest]: hopeful about India's democracy even though we are going through some difficult times right now
[Guest]: there's a kind of populist strain to our democracy right now and it at times is quite nasty and
[Guest]: difficult to deal with as a citizen but I'm still very hopeful that democratic sources of resilience
[Guest]: will come in come into play and there will be some moderation that will happen and I think as a
[Guest]: democracy that we have sustained as a democracy for such a long time hardly anybody gave us a
[Guest]: chance when we became democratic and in fact in the colonial era the best liberals in the 19th
[Guest]: century you mentioned Tocqueville. Tocqueville was a big supporter of colonialism including British
[Guest]: colonialism in India he said he was a great thinker on democracy he had strong moral commitments to
[Guest]: democracy but he had a different view of what how colonialism in country like India but we kind of
[Guest]: you know pushed back against those views and so we made democracy work more or less and now
[Guest]: I mean compared to that immediate era after independence we've had much more of distribution
[Guest]: of power in society more and more groups are getting incorporated in different ways finding
[Guest]: representation in into society into the democratic system into through different political parties
[Guest]: through state apparatus and all of that so the democracy is working as a social principle you
[Guest]: should never forget that democracy is finally a fundamentally social principle it's it's some
[Guest]: it's a quality of societies you know that you're democratic you have a certain commitment to
[Guest]: fundamental equality of conditions and it's happening I mean we didn't have the American
[Guest]: kind of beginning right we started with equality of conditions there wasn't any central government
[Guest]: local liberties all of that we had a colonial state and it was the top heavy state and even
[Guest]: though villages and communities were pushing back a little bit there was still a quite a bit of
[Guest]: top heavy interference in life and we democratized and we started we had a it was a matter of faith
[Guest]: for our founders that we will work as a democracy and we have live up to the expectation more or
[Guest]: less you know we've continued our democracy there was a brief interlude of of a kind of a
[Guest]: democratership or dictatorship you can call it and we've continued so on we had a big failing
[Guest]: on economic side for a few decades we corrected that we corrected that in a very big way I would
[Guest]: say we should not underestimate what we have achieved in those in these three decades we have
[Guest]: we can do much better we have a long long way to go but we have a our own one generation of
[Guest]: record to show that we can do quite quite well on the side of whether I mean there is a side
[Guest]: of social kind of civic life and social life which needs to have there will be conflicts there will
[Guest]: be I mean multicultural culture is very hard we should never compare ourselves with western
[Guest]: multicultural discourse their multiculturalism is a very different context they are highly
[Guest]: secularized society where religion has taken a very very small role in society and accepted that
[Guest]: role for itself people who are religious also practice in very different ways you know from us
[Guest]: we have a strong number of large number of people who true believers strong believers and very
[Guest]: suspicious of other communities because they are very they're very deeply embedded in their
[Guest]: own traditions religious traditions so multiculturalism is very hard in India and and and
[Guest]: therefore controlling for that we've done quite well I would say because democracy itself creates
[Guest]: you know incentives to mobilize one group against another all of that it happens but given all of
[Guest]: that we've not done too badly if you took a long view don't get too upset about some particular
[Guest]: events or something which which which are obviously bad in themselves so and that's a
[Guest]: surprising thing because democracy creates incentives to do much worse on that and we've
[Guest]: not done so badly and hopefully we'll not do worse in the near future so across I mean
[Guest]: phase in which democracy works I think we I'm much more hopeful I mean than I would have been
[Guest]: say even 30 I mean I I was too young at that time at 30 years ago we are going through on some
[Guest]: aspects of our especially on the aspects of anti-politics and all some difficult patch right
[Guest]: now and I think we cannot take it too lightly we should take it seriously and we should try to
[Guest]: find low-cost ways to get out of this kind of a politics which is pretty I mean harmful for
[Guest]: democracy because ultimately equality is a foundation of democracy and nobody should feel
[Guest]: less lesser of a citizen you know than anyone else so that I think is very important but I
[Guest]: think our democratic resilience is there and we can certainly find ways to you know moderate
[Guest]: whatever is happening and I'm not I never put democracy up to some abstract standard and say
[Guest]: if you don't meet my standard then you're not a much of a democracy you have to judge democracy
[Guest]: on its own terms and given our I mean complexity of our society different identities different
[Guest]: regional religious identities as a multicultural society given the level of poverty and all we had
[Guest]: earlier we've come a long way you know and therefore one of the most important things
[Guest]: I feel at least in private conversation I say is that do not give up on India you know don't give
[Guest]: up like this is a rotten society and this and that because some events happen and somebody
[Guest]: reacts in this way that puts the society which is the whole democracy there's one thing right that
[Guest]: empowers the whole and parts become very weak and you can feel very small because of that sometimes
[Guest]: if you think about it this way that hey what am I there's this large body politic is there
[Guest]: and what who am I to I can't change it I should just give up on it and be a part of some other
[Guest]: country's history just move but I say that I mean let's keep trying you know like to go back to
[Guest]: Chesterton that Rome Rome would be great because Romans love it so we need to keep that faith and
[Guest]: keep working whatever we need to do as citizens especially at local I mean everyone friends and
[Guest]: family level to try to kind of keep doing better because I think it's the most interesting country
[Guest]: in the world in the sense that what we are trying to do right now the journey that we have made the
[Guest]: future I mean the stakes are just staggering then to to quote misquote Lucas that you know
[Guest]: the consequences are simply staggering and we have to invest in this process and ultimately
[Guest]: democracy is self-governance democracy is ruled by the people every anybody who has power has
[Guest]: the power from the people and people it's ultimately people who will decide what will
[Guest]: be rewarded and what will be punished what will work and what will not work and therefore we
[Guest]: should even though the hole is much larger than us we are part of that hole as well constituent
[Guest]: of that hole and we need to keep that democratic faith and keep working towards a perfection of
[Amit Varma]: this democracy you know. Yeah when you say the the hole I mean do you mean WHOLE or HOLE but
[Amit Varma]: a penultimate question which is that you mentioned that we are in a fix but we have to find a low
[Amit Varma]: cost way out of it so what do you mean by low cost and what would be high cost?
[Guest]: I don't know but what would be the low right way out of it but there is a particular dynamic that
[Guest]: is at play which is an identarian dynamic where basically a community is reduced to its worst
[Guest]: elements and it happens with different communities at different points of time and it happening with
[Guest]: some communities at this point of time that you obviously all communities have some fanatics in
[Guest]: some way but vast majority don't like that don't live like that and although I mean there is a
[Guest]: they can do something more than they do to moderate the fanatics and maybe they can't
[Guest]: and we don't know but when you reduce the entire community to the worst of their motivations then
[Guest]: obviously it becomes a question of can we coexist and all of that. Those kind of questions are
[Guest]: getting raised more and more now I think in India and democratic politics is working in a way that
[Guest]: these questions are getting more and more raised on a regular basis and there's much more mobilization
[Guest]: around those kind of issues. Now I believe at least my understanding of what's possible is that
[Guest]: if you focus on I mean where the real problem is where there's actual genuine fanaticism and
[Guest]: there's genuine kind of a threat and not make it something broader and focus on solving that
[Guest]: problem you can find a way to kind of overcome this sense of anxiety and fear that we have kind
[Guest]: of there's so much fear in India right now like this strange fear like if you open the television
[Guest]: just it throws fear at you you know so many news channels just throwing fear and anxiety
[Guest]: all the time it's really something which has become a part of our air in some ways you know
[Guest]: Delhi air is very thick anyway and thicker because I don't have a tv at home but whenever I go
[Guest]: somewhere I watch tv and I'm like oh my god what what is going on the level of you know over the
[Guest]: top rhetoric and the simple oversimplification of issues like you go anecdotal when you want
[Guest]: to avoid someone and statistically you want to defend yourself you know so yeah that guy did it
[Guest]: that identity so it must be the entire community is like that it's it's not good for coexistence
[Guest]: in a multicultural society you have to be more precise talk about what's going on find facts
[Guest]: report on the facts there may be problems there may be fanaticism there may be some degree of
[Guest]: extremism going on but attack that identify that it has to be more precise and fear anxiety that is
[Guest]: being pervaded social media has done that to some extent mainstream media television media
[Guest]: is contributing a lot and that fear I really worry that at a subconscious level it it is
[Guest]: making us into something which we'll see the consequences maybe in a decade or two
[Guest]: if we can change that if we can get I mean leadership basically it's something that
[Guest]: we've done that level leaders not just the current leaders people who readers who rise
[Guest]: who have the wisdom to see the problems of these ways and say okay can we do better can we can we
[Guest]: be more precise about actual problems and not create demons of our own to destroy you know
[Guest]: that's one the other is as I said perhaps if we focus on other things which is common good
[Guest]: collective action cooperation for development and growth hopefully we can have a little less of
[Guest]: a focus on these things because our psychological wounds are many you know we have been as a
[Guest]: civilization being ruled for many many centuries and we don't even know the depth of our sufferings
[Guest]: you know and if we if we bring those out on a regular basis and spread fear and anxiety
[Guest]: I mean this is a tiger that you will that eat the ones who are riding it also you know so
[Guest]: it is possible I'm not saying that we are there yet one good hope is that we are not
[Guest]: completely modern we don't think in those clear-cut category ways many of us some are
[Guest]: so there is still much more intertwining of lives and much more of a amorphousness to the identity
[Guest]: in India I think so for example I still go to Dargah sometimes like this that not just me my
[Guest]: family so there is some of that sources of resilience democracy itself has both sources of
[Guest]: risk and also sources of resilience and we have a big hope for progress we've got a taste of
[Guest]: progress right in three years three decades good serious taste of progress economic progress
[Guest]: we've got some source of social progress let's wet that appetite a little more let's work together
[Guest]: towards you know progress towards a richer more I mean more robustly multicultural society you
[Guest]: know because I don't think we're going to secularize anytime soon and I don't know whether
[Guest]: it's a good thing at all or not we've existed a multicultural society with different religions
[Guest]: coexisting different regional identities all of that and it's a great advantage to be a part of
[Guest]: India like sub-regional sub-national sentiments and all should be I mean kept under some kind of a
[Guest]: limit because it's great to be a part of this country and there are many benefits economic
[Guest]: and otherwise of being part of this that's another element that we shouldn't stoke too much
[Guest]: because being a part of a whole like this you know like a country as big as India is culturally
[Guest]: and economically and politically very beneficial for different parts even the parts that are doing
[Amit Varma]: the much better than others. I hope your hopes come to fruition though I also worried that the
[Amit Varma]: fear and the anxiety are real and we might be trapped in a vicious circle where they just
[Amit Varma]: spiral and take us into a very dark place. Final question which I always sort of end my episodes
[Amit Varma]: with which is why don't you recommend for me and my listeners books, music, films that mean a lot to you?
[Guest]: Books, music and films. Oh whatever any art. Yeah so on the book recommendations I link up to
[Guest]: the themes that we discussed today. So one theme was democracy and I think the best book on
[Guest]: democracy is Tocqueville's Democracy in America. It's a great book and everyone should try to read
[Guest]: it and engage with it seriously and if you want to get a book about that book it's basically I think
[Guest]: the best in that category in my view is Pierre Manon's Tocqueville and the Nature of Democracy.
[Guest]: It's a short book and it's a really great well-done book. Then a lot of the books by Pierre
[Guest]: Roseval is also very insightful but especially I really liked his latest book on populism. I think
[Guest]: it's the best book on populism and it's important to understand our times and how democracy is
[Guest]: getting transformed in some ways by populism and why that may have happened, how to think about it
[Guest]: theoretically. We talked about virtues and there are many books on virtues in different traditions
[Guest]: and I will just recommend one which we mentioned indirectly so that if one wants to go and get
[Guest]: into it and more deeply is Alasdair MacIntyre's After Virtue. I think it's a great book and
[Guest]: we mentioned it and others I'm not going to. We talked a little bit about technology also right
[Guest]: and so I would recommend Don Ide's work on human technology relations philosophy of technology.
[Guest]: There are a couple of recent books I enjoyed reading one was a book on technology and
[Guest]: virtues by Shannon Valor and another one on nihilism and technology which takes a Nietzschean
[Guest]: perspective on technology by this young philosopher Nolan Kurtz. Then we talked about
[Guest]: political economy also that was the I mean large part of our conversation so I would suggest at
[Guest]: least from a more comparative and I mean perspective and understanding theory of
[Guest]: growth and political economy. A lot of new social economics work by people like Douglas North,
[Guest]: Alina Rostrom and others is quite illuminating and gives you a good way of thinking about this
[Guest]: thing in my view. Also the work of Albert Hirschman is very powerful even now in thinking
[Guest]: about growth and development economic progress. Then I've benefited a lot from accessing the
[Guest]: empirical work by people like Lan Pritchett and all and there are there's a community of people
[Guest]: who do this kind of work and it's it's worth engaging with it gives you things about thinking
[Guest]: about it ways to think about these issues and there's a book which is not an economics book
[Guest]: but I found it very useful to think about political economy then on complex adaptive
[Guest]: systems. It's a book by Robert Axelrod. It's called Harnessing Complexity. So it's one of
[Guest]: the best books on complexity and it gives you a language to speak about complexity and move away
[Guest]: from the language of you know top-down thinking in that sense. I mean religion there I mean
[Guest]: basically the best way is to read scriptures and try to engage with them whether it's philosophical
[Guest]: scripts texts or religious books holy books or mythological books but also epics. I really enjoy
[Guest]: reading epics so Mahabharata, Odyssey also like epic poems like Divine Comedy and Rashmi Rathee
[Guest]: and all are very interesting to me. So I would say yeah I mean that's where I would I'm linking it to
[Guest]: themes that we discussed now. I mean music I mean I don't have much of a recommendation with the
[Guest]: only music I really enjoy is old Hindi film music. I just listen to that only now that's all
[Guest]: that's my musical life so to speak nothing more than that. So Kishore Kumar, Muhammad Rafi,
[Guest]: Lata Vangeshkar's old songs that's my kind of musical life so to speak. Then movies I would
[Guest]: say because the movies word works more through authors you know that so some directors who work
[Guest]: I enjoy Tarkovsky for example especially movies like Andrea Rublev and all I mean perfect
[Guest]: achievements on what you can do with cinema. Burnwell, Kurosawa, Satyajit Ray and then I enjoy
[Guest]: good fun movies like Mission Impossible movies, good funny movies, well done funny movies like
[Guest]: Bad News Beer and all you know or this old Hindi movies I like a lot like movies like Anand and
[Guest]: Dilip Kumar movies. So I mean that's where my current kind of taste lies so I mean it is what
[Guest]: it is. Great Sush, thanks so much for coming on the show this was great. Thank you Amit for having
[Guest]: me always good to talk to you and you have a very intriguing skill to bring out get people to talk
[Guest]: about things that they would not normally talk about. You didn't talk about many things today
[Amit Varma]: but we shall get you on the show again and we'll see what we can do. Sure, sure very happy to.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode head on over to the show notes enter rabbit holes at will
[Amit Varma]: you can follow Suyash on twitter at Suyash Rai all other relevant links to him are in the show notes
[Amit Varma]: you can follow me on twitter at Amit Verma A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A you can browse past episodes
[Amit Varma]: of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in. Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Scene and the Unseen? If so, would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show? You can go over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contribute any
[Amit Varma]: amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.